Title: 2026.findings-acl.2099.pdf

URL Source: https://aclanthology.org/2026.findings-acl.2099.pdf

Published Time: Thu, 11 Jun 2026 02:36:57 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2026 , pages 42303–42320 July 2-7, 2026 ©2026 Association for Computational Linguistics PROBE: PROcess-Based BEnchmark for Hallucination Detection 

Yu Zhang 1∗, Peter Belcak 2, Shizhe Diao 2, Yonggan Fu 2,Shaona Ghosh 2, Morteza Mardani 2, Eileen Long 2, Bei Yu 1, Pavlo Molchanov 21Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 NVIDIA 

Abstract 

Hallucination detection remains a significant challenge for large language models. Exist-ing agentic applications rely on LLMs to self-assess the factuality of their outputs using single-step “LLM-as-a-judge” prompts. How-ever, even when equipped with ground truth in-formation, current LLMs still fall short in de-tecting hallucinations, and this one-shot eval-uation offers neither the transparency nor the granularity needed to diagnose where and why the detection fails. To address this gap, we introduce PROBE ( Pro cess-based Be nchmark for Hallucination Detection), a comprehensive benchmark that breaks down hallucination de-tection into four critical steps: claim decom-position, evidence finding, evidence evalua-tion, and hallucination localization, and eval-uates each step individually. PROBE consists of 12,000 test cases across three task types-summarization, question answering, and style transfer. Critically, we demonstrate that when hallucination detection is treated as a multi-step process, all models achieve considerably better performance. Through extensive eval-uation, we show that current LLMs struggle chiefly with evidence finding, and that finetun-ing on our released training data substantially improves performance on this step. PROBE represents a significant step toward more trans-parent, diagnosable, and robust hallucination detection systems. 

1 Introduction 

In recent years, language models have made re-markable progress across many language mod-eling tasks, including text generation (Li et al., 2024), text summarization (Zhang et al., 2024), and question answering (Allemang and Sequeda, 2024). However, one of the key challenges in de-ploying LMs to perform these tasks in real-world applications is their tendency to hallucinate facts. 

* Work done during an internship at NVIDIA. a) Outcome-based Evaluation (Direct Prompting)          

> Model Output (Long-form Text)
> Prompting for Factual Correctness Final Evaluation Result
> Contains Hallucination
> Binary judgment on the fi nal answer only.
> b) Process-based Evaluation (Proposed, Step-wise)
> Model Output (Long-form Text)
> Step 1: Claim Decomposition
> Claim A Claim B Claim C
> Step 2: Evidence Finding
> Claim B
> 🔍 Claim A
> 🔍  Claim C
> 🔍
> Locate Evidence for A, B, C
> Step 3: Evidence Evaluation
> ⏬Claim A: Relevant Evidence
> ⏬Claim B: Irrelevant Evidence
> ⏬Claim C: No Evidence
> Step 4: Hallucination Localization
> 1. "Claim A" [ ✅Factual - Supported] 2. "Claim B" [ ❌Hallucinated - Unsupported] 3. "Claim C" [ ❌Hallucinated - Unveri fi able]

Figure 1: Comparison of hallucination detection ap-proaches. Our proposed step-wise evaluation provides fine-grained insights for factual hallucination detec-tion. 

This typically entails the model generating content that is not grounded in factual information or pro-vided context (Niu et al., 2023) – behavior that is deeply rooted in the nature of LM generation: even when given authoritative source documents, the model is not inherently constrained to produce outputs that strictly follow the facts in its input. As a result, detecting factual hallucinations has be-come a critical problem for ensuring the safety and trustworthiness of LM-based systems. In terms of factual hallucination detection, var-ious agentic applications have emerged in which LLMs are prompted to self-reflect or self-judge their own outputs to improve factuality (Hu et al., 2024; Song et al., 2024; Mishra et al., 2024). In these applications, the LLM is invoked as a judge to identify factual inconsistencies between its gen-erated content and the provided ground-truth in-formation. Correspondingly, a range of evalua-tion benchmarks has been developed to measure LLMs hallucination detection capabilities at both the word/span level and the sample level. For example, RAGTruth (Niu et al., 2023) offers a 

42303 corpus tailored for detecting word-level hallucina-tions in RAG settings, whereas HaluBench (Ravi et al., 2024) evaluates hallucination recognition at the sample level using binary labels to indicate whether a models output contains hallucinations. Despite growing interest in this direction, ex-isting approaches suffer from a fundamental lim-itation. Current benchmarks focus primarily on outcome-based evaluation, assessing only whether the final answer is factually correct yet providing no insight into why this detection process succeeds or fails. This limitation becomes more pronounced in long-context scenarios, where direct prompt-ing is insufficient for reliably identifying hallucina-tions (Wei et al., 2024). In general, existing eval-uation methods treat hallucination detection as a monolithic task, overlooking the distinct cognitive capabilities required for effective fact-checking: the ability to decompose complex claims, find rel-evant evidence, evaluate evidence relevance, and precisely localize unsupported claims. Motivated by this, we introduce PROBE 

(PRO cess-Based BE nchmark for Hallucination Detection), a comprehensive benchmark for evalu-ating hallucination detection capabilities through a multi-step assessment process. PROBE comprises 12,000 test cases across three diverse task types, including summarization, question answering, and style transfer, with 118,628 annotated claims with detailed annotations at both claim and evidence levels. Our benchmark decomposes hallucination detection into four critical steps: (1) claim decom-position , evaluating the model’s ability to break down complex statements into verifiable atomic claims; (2) evidence finding , assessing whether models can locate truthful and relevant evidence; (3) evidence evaluation , measuring the capability to differentiate relevant from irrelevant evidence; and (4) hallucination localization , determining the exact span of hallucinated content. Our key contributions are: 1. We introduce PROBE, the first large-scale process-based benchmark suite for fine-grained hallucination detection across multi-ple tasks. 2. We introduce a comprehensive evaluation framework that breaks down hallucination detection into four distinct capabilities, en-abling more precise diagnosis of model strengths and weaknesses. 3. We build a high-quality dataset spanning three categories of real-world LLM tasks, featuring annotated claim-evidence pairs and precise-annotated hallucinations. 4. We conduct extensive experiments evaluating current LLMs on each step of the process, identifying evidence finding as the primary performance bottleneck and establishing de-tailed step-wise baselines. 5. We show that process-based evaluation yields more actionable insights than one-shot LLM-as-a-judge prompting and that step-wise su-pervision enables more effective model im-provement. In particular, we demonstrate that finetuning on our released training data sub-stantially enhances model performance on the hardest steps. 

2 Motivation 

This paper investigates a new paradigm for eval-uating the hallucination detection capabilities of large language models. Specifically, our work is motivated by three key observations: • Granular Diagnosis Matters : Decompos-ing hallucination detection into well-defined stages enables fine-grained diagnosis of model failures. This breakdown makes it pos-sible to pinpoint where a model goes wrong, such as inaccurate claim extraction, weak ev-idence retrieval, or incorrect evidence eval-uation, providing actionable insights for im-proving accuracy. • Process Evaluation Enhances Detection Accuracy : A decomposed hallucination de-tection process yields substantially higher detection accuracy than one-shot outcome-based evaluation, as shown in Figure 4b. By explicitly modeling the reasoning pipeline, models achieve more faithful and robust as-sessments of factual consistency. • Stronger Learning through Process Super-vision : Outcome-based supervision offers only a coarse and often ambiguous training signal. In contrast, granular step-level anno-tations supply rich process supervision that guides models toward mastering each compo-nent of the hallucination detection workflow, leading to more effective learning and better generalization. 42304 STAGE 1 :Base Content Generation    

> FINAL OUTPUT :PROBE
> STAGE 3 : Claim-Evidence Pair Generation
> Claim Decomposition Evidence Finding
> Evidence Evaluation
> Faithful Claim
> Hallucinated Claim
> SOURCE DATA :Clean Wikipedia (3,000 articles)
> STAGE 2 : Hallucination Insertion
> Complexity 1 Complexity 2 Complexity 3
> Ground Truth Retrieval

Figure 2: PROBE generation pipeline. (1) Base content generation, where responses are generated using LLMs with natural prompts; (2) Hallucination insertion, in which three levels of hallucinations are synthetically injected into the base content while preserving linguistic consistency; and (3) Claim-evidence pair generation, where fron-tier models are leveraged to find evidence from the ground truth and vote on evidences. 

3 PROBE Construction 

The term hallucination in the context of LLMs is commonly used in two distinct ways. It may refer to nonfactual content, where model outputs are not grounded in real-world knowledge, or to unfaith-ful or inconsistent content, where the generated text fails to adhere to the provided input. PROBE focuses on the latter setting in which an LLM must complete a task such as summarization, question answering, or style transfer based on a given pas-sage or reference, as in Retrieval-Augmented Gen-eration (RAG) (Lewis et al., 2020). Under this def-inition, a statement is considered unfaithful when it lacks support from the source material. Figure 2 illustrates the pipeline used to gener-ate and annotate our dataset, which includes three types of poisoned content: summaries, questionan-swer pairs, and style-transferred texts. Across all task types, the generation process follows a con-sistent pattern involving baseline content genera-tion, hallucination injection, and claim-evidence pair generation. 

3.1 Task Definition and Content Generation 

We consider three widely used generation tasks under RAG settings: summarization, question an-swering, and style transfer. We randomly sam-ple 1,000 articles for each task from the training split of the Clean Wikipedia dataset (Foly et al., 2025), resulting in 3,000 source documents. For summarization, LLMs are prompted to produce a concise summary of each source document. For question answering, we first prompt the language model to generate a question about the provided text that can be answered with a small number (2-4) of concrete facts. The model is then asked to answer each generated question using only the re-trieved passages corresponding to the article. For style transfer, the goal is to rewrite the article in a different style while preserving its meaning. We consider four target styles: blog post, lecture notes, FAQ, and textbook. For each article, one style is selected at random, and the LLM is prompted to rewrite the original Wikipedia text accordingly, yielding approximately 25% of samples in each style category. In this step, as well as in the sub-sequent hallucination insertion step, we use GPT-OSS-120B (OpenAI, 2025) for generation, bal-ancing quality with computational efficiency. All prompts used to generate outputs for these tasks are provided in the Appendix B. 

3.2 Hallucination Insertion 

To precisely control the location of hallucinations, we construct unfaithful hallucinations by syntheti-cally injecting poisoned semantics, i.e., statements that appear plausible and factual but are in fact un-supported by the source context. We define a se-mantic perturbation as a subsequence that remains semantically coherent within the generated answer yet lacks any retrievable supporting evidence in the groundedness setting, thereby constituting a claim-level unfaithful hallucination. PROBE comprises three blocks of samples that enable evaluation for summarization, question an-swering, and style transfer over Wikipedia articles. Each block contains 1,000 baseline samples and 3,000 samples with synthetically injected plausi-ble factual hallucinations of three complexity lev-els. Complexity 1 samples contain one factual hallucination, usually as a direct mention incorpo-rated in the otherwise accurate summary. Com-plexity 2 samples contain two factual hallucina-tions, either as direct mentions or as fabricated factual statements presented as supporting or logi-cally extending true claims. Complexity 3 samples include three factual hallucinations introduced in the same manners as Complexity 1 and 2, with the 42305 Task # Instance # Claims # Claims Response Length Hallucination Length Hallucinated Truth Mean Max Mean Max % Resp.                                     

> Summarization 4,000 41,558 9,908 31,560 1,697 5,331 223 2,832 15.13% Question Answering 4,000 12,018 5,489 6,529 167 1,305 135 562 47.42% Style Transfer 4,000 65,052 10,216 54,836 2,060 8,437 332 1,063 16.93%
> Overall 12,000 118,628 25,613 92,925 1,308 8,437 230 2,832 29.96%
> Table 1: Claim-level statistics of PROBE. We report hallucinated claims (from injected segments) and truthful claims supported by strong multi-model consensus. Here “Resp.” stands for “Response” and % Resp. denotes the proportion of hallucination regarding the whole response.

additional property that genuinely true statements may be derived through logical inference from the hallucinated claims. Annotations describing spans corresponding to hallucinated claims are provided in the dataset. In general, PROBE consists of three subsets designed to evaluate factuality in summariza-tion, question answering, and style transfer over Wikipedia articles. Each subset contains 1,000 hallucination-free baseline samples and 3,000 samples with synthetically injected plausible fac-tual hallucinations, evenly distributed across three complexity levels. 

3.3 Claim-Evidence Pair Generation Claim Decomposition . To construct high-quality claim-evidence pairs, we first decompose each sample into a set of atomic claims. We define a 

claim as the smallest unit of information that can be independently evaluated against a given con-text. This formulation follows prior work on hal-lucination and factuality evaluation, which simi-larly decomposes model outputs into claims for fine-grained assessment (Min et al., 2023; Ak-bar et al., 2024; Hu et al., 2024). Each claim is associated with the specific text segment in the ground truth source that expresses it. For this step, we invoke a language model (Llama-3.1-70B (AI@Meta, 2024)) in parallel to perform claim decomposition. Claims originating from synthetically injected hallucination segments are directly labeled as hallucinated, since no support-ing evidence exists in the source document. For claims derived from baseline content, we then per-form the following evidence finding step to re-trieve evidence from original Wikipedia sources. 

Evidence Finding . In this step, we re-trieve candidate evidence spans from the original Wikipedia articles using four frontier LLMs, in-cluding Llama-3.1-70B (AI@Meta, 2024), GPT-4o-mini (Hurst et al., 2024), Mixtral-8Œ22B (Mis-tral.ai, 2024), and Claude-Sonnet-4.5 (Anthropic, 2025). We take the union of all retrieved evidence spans as the candidate evidence set. Here we ob-serve that LLaMA-3.1-70B outperforms LLaMA-3.3-70B on our task, which we attribute to its stronger alignment with explicit task instructions. In contrast, LLaMA-3.3-70B appears to favor broader generalization, which does not translate as effectively to our instruction-sensitive setting. Ac-cordingly, we adopt LLama-3.1-70B throughout this paper. 

Evidence Evaluation . Then, each evidence candi-date is independently evaluated by the same four models to determine whether it supports the corre-sponding claim, producing a binary judgment. A piece of evidence is accepted as supporting if at least 3 out of 4 models agree, i.e., >=0.75 con-sensus. The resulting verified evidences form the claims supporting evidence set. Claims with one or more verified evidence spans are labeled as truth claims, and claims without any supporting evidence are labeled as hallucinated claims. This procedure yields an accurate and robust claimev-idence dataset, with faithful claims grounded by validated evidence and hallucinated claims pre-cisely identified through controlled perturbation. 

3.4 Benchmark Statistics 

We presented detailed statistics of PROBE in Ta-ble 1. Compared to existing datasets for hallu-cination detection, PROBE is considerably large in scale. In total, the benchmark contains 12,000 generated responses and 118,628 claims extracted from 9,000 samples across summarization, ques-tion answering, and style transfer tasks. Specifi-cally, we focus on two claim categories: halluci-nated claims, which originate from synthetically injected segments, and high-confidence grounded claims, which are supported by evidence vali-dated with strong multi-model consensus. Over-all, PROBE includes 25,613 hallucinated claims 42306 (21.7%) and 92,925 high-confidence grounded claims (78.3%). The dataset exhibits substantial diversity in re-sponse length and hallucination characteristics across tasks. Summarization and style transfer pro-duce substantially longer responses (mean lengths of 1,697 and 2,060 characters, respectively), result-ing in relatively low hallucination ratios at the re-sponse level (15.13% and 16.93%). In contrast, question answering responses are shorter on aver-age but contain a much higher proportion of hal-lucinated content (47.42%), reflecting the brittle-ness of factual precision in concise answers. Over-all, hallucinated spans average 230 characters in length and account for 29.96% of responses, un-derscoring the necessity of fine-grained, claim-level evaluation rather than coarse response-level judgments. 

4 Evaluation 

4.1 Setup Hallucination Detection Algorithms . We eval-uate both direct prompting baselines and our proposed process-based hallucination detection method. For direct prompting, large language models are instructed in a single step to identify hallucinated content within a generated response. In contrast, our process-based approach decom-poses hallucination detection into four sub-steps, including claim decomposition, evidence finding, evidence evaluation and hallucination localization. All hallucination detection prompts are manu-ally designed and applied uniformly across fron-tier models, including Llama-3.1-70B (AI@Meta, 2024), GPT-4o-mini (Hurst et al., 2024), Mixtral-8Œ22B (Mistral.ai, 2024), and Claude-Sonnet-4.5 (Anthropic, 2025). Detailed prompt templates and implementation details are provided in the Ap-pendix. 

Data Split . All detection algorithms are evaluated on the same evaluation set of PROBE. This eval-uation set is constructed by randomly sampling 100 instances from each task type: summariza-tion, question answering, and style transfer. The remaining data is used exclusively for fine-tuning language models to enhance its capability in ev-idence finding and evidence evaluation, ensuring no overlap between training and evaluation sam-ples. 

Evaluation Metrics . Unlike prior work that eval-uates hallucination detection at the response level 85%              

> 90%
> 95%
> 100%
> Precision Recall F1 Precision Recall F1 Precision Recall F1
> Summarization QA Style Transfer
> Llama-3.1-70B GPT-4o-mini Mixtral-8x22B Claude-Sonnet-4.5

Figure 3: The claim decomposition performance of LLMs on PROBE. Frontier LLMs perform strongly on this task, achieving high recall and laying a solid foun-dation for step-wise evaluation. 

or word level, we adopt a fine-grained claim-wise evaluation protocol. Specifically, we compute claim-level matching between the predicted hal-lucination claims and the ground-truth annotated hallucination claims. Based on this overlap, we report precision, recall, and F1 score at the charac-ter level, which more accurately reflects a models ability to localize hallucinated content within long and complex responses. Unlike prior work that evaluates hallucination detection at the response or word level, we adopt a fine-grained, claim-wise evaluation protocol. Specifically, we match predicted hallucinated claims against ground-truth annotated hallucination claims at the claim level. Based on the resulting matchs, we compute preci-sion, recall, and F1, which more accurately mea-sure a models ability to localize hallucinated con-tent within long and complex responses. 

4.2 Step-Wise Results of PROBE Claim Decomposition . The first step in our eval-uation pipeline assesses the quality of claim de-composition, which determines whether a model can correctly identify the set of claims present in a generated response. We directly prompt the LLMs to decompose each response into a set of atomic claims. The extracted claims are then matched against ground-truth claims annotated in PROBE. As shown in Figure 3, both precision and recall are consistently high across tasks, especifically for the recall (consistently > 95%). This indicates that modern LLMs are effective at identifying atomic claims in generated text, and that claim decompo-sition itself is a relatively easy subtask compared to later stages such as evidence finding and evalu-ation. The strong performance on claim decom-position thus provides a reliable foundation for downstream steps in the process-based evaluation pipeline, enabling more meaningful analysis of ev-idence finding and evaluation capabilities. 

Evidence Finding . The second evaluation stage examines the ability of LLMs to find supporting 42307 Table 2: The evidence finding (EF) and evidence evaluation (EE) accuracy of LLMs on PROBE. “Partial” denotes retrieving at least one correct supporting evidence, while “Complete” denotes retrieving all required supporting evidence. SFT Llama-3.1-8B refers to the fine-tuned Llama-3.1-8B model. Overall, current frontier LLMs exhibit sub-optimal performance on both EF and EE, whereas the fine-tuned model consistently performs better.                                                         

> Models Partial Evidence Finding Complete Evidence Finding Evidence Evaluation
> Summarization QA Style Transfer Summarization QA Style Transfer Summarization QA Style Transfer Llama-3.1-70B 82.7 88.6 82.9 69.2 69.7 69.0 77.5 72.3 81.9 GPT-4o-mini 78.7 80.1 79.2 64.2 61.6 66.5 79.9 70.6 79.2 Mixtral-8x22B 77.0 82.0 77.9 63.4 63.5 66.0 80.3 71.6 77.9 Claude-Sonnet-4.5 81.6 86.4 81.6 68.1 69.1 69.1 81.6 69.8 81.6 SFT Llama-3.1-8B 83.2 87.4 84.1 70.3 70.1 71.4 82.9 80.7 83.1

evidences for a given claim. For each claim that is correctly matched in the claim decomposition step, the model is prompted to identify evidences from the ground-truth Wikipedia article. We evaluate evidence finding using two complementary met-rics. Partial Match measures whether the model retrieves at least one correct supporting evidence span for a claim, while Complete Match requires the model to retrieve all annotated supporting evi-dences associated with that claim. As shown in Table 2, frontier models achieve relatively high partial match scores (about 80%), indicating that LLMs are often able to locate at least one relevant evidence. However, complete match performance remains substantially lower, revealing a significant gap in the LLM’s ability to comprehensively retrieve all necessary evidence. These results highlight evidence finding as a major bottleneck in the hallucination detection process. While models can often identify some relevant context, they struggle to exhaustively recover all supporting evidence, which limits reliable down-stream evidence evaluation and hallucination lo-calization. 

Evidence Evaluation . The third stage evaluates the ability of LLMs to judge whether candidate evidence supports a given claim using a binary voting mechanism. To isolate evidence evaluation from retrieval quality, we reuse the candidate ev-idences obtained in the EF step and perform no additional retrieval. For truth claims , a prediction is considered correct if the evaluator votes support 

for its truth evidences. For hallucinated claims ,a prediction is considered correct if the evaluator votes non-support for possibly retrieved evidences. As shown in Table 2, the overall accuracy of ev-idence evaluation is sub-optimal. Even the ad-vanced Claude-Sonnet-4.5 tends to misclassify ev-idences, achieving a low accuracy of only 69.8%. This indicates that, even when candidate evidence is provided, LLMs struggle to reliably assess evi-dence sufficiency and relevance, making evidence evaluation a non-trivial bottleneck in the hallucina-tion detection pipeline. 

Hallucination Localization . The final stage eval-uates the models ability to localize hallucinated content in the generated response. This step reuses the hallucination predictions from the evidence evaluation stage, where claims without supporting evidence are classified as hallucinated. To assess localization accuracy, we match predicted halluci-nated claims to ground-truth hallucination annota-tions, reusing the semantic claim matching results in the first step. Therefore, no additional model inference is performed in this step. We report precision, recall, and F1 score for hal-lucination localization. As shown in Figure 4a, all LLMs achieve high recall (above 80%), in-dicating that step-wise reasoning effectively cap-tures most hallucinated content, but their preci-sion remains relatively low, reflecting limitations in the evidence evaluation step. Notably, the Claude-Sonnet-4.5 model achieves the highest re-call (88.8%) but the lowest precision (74.5%), due to its conservative voting behavior in the evidence evaluation step. Overall, GPT-4o-mini demon-strates the best balance, achieving the highest av-erage F1 score. 

4.3 Hallucination Detection Performance 

We compare hallucination detection performance between direct prompting and our process-based evaluation method. We focus primarily on recall, as it directly reflects a models ability to identify hallucinated content within generated responses. As shown in Figure 4b, direct prompting yields very low recall (below 40%), indicating that LLMs struggle to reliably detect hallucinations in long-form generations when asked to do so in a single step. In contrast, the process-based method consis-tently achieves substantially higher recall, gener-ally exceeding 80% and reaching up to 90% in the 42308 70%                         

> 80%
> 90%
> 100%
> Precision Recall F1 Precision Recall F1 Precision Recall F1
> Summarization QA Style Transfer
> Llama-3.1-70B GPT-4o-mini Mixtral-8x22B Claude-Sonnet-4.5 (a) 40%
> 60%
> 80%
> 100%
> Direct Process Direct Process Direct Process
> Summarization QA Style Transfer
> Llama-3.1-70B GPT-4o-mini Mixtral-8x22B Claude-Sonnet-4.5 (b)

Figure 4: (a) The final step-wise hallucination localization performance of LLMs on PROBE. All models achieve high recall yet relatively low precision, reflecting limitations in correctly identifying supported evidence. (b) Comparison of direct prompting and process-based evaluation. The process-based evaluation consistently achieves higher recall than direct prompting. 

best case. These results demonstrate that decom-posing hallucination detection into explicit reason-ing steps is critical for effectively identifying hallu-cinations in long and complex model outputs, and strongly motivate the use of process-based evalua-tion over one-shot LM-as-a-judge prompting. 

4.4 Finetuning Performance 

We utilize the Llama-3.1-8B (AI@Meta, 2024) model as the backbone model for fine-tuning to im-prove evidence finding and evidence evaluation ca-pabilities. We perform full-parameter fine-tuning with a learning rate of 2e−5. Training uses the Adam optimizer (Kingma, 2014) with β1 = 0 .9

and β2 = 0 .999 , together with a cosine learning rate scheduler and a 2% warm-up over the total training steps. The fine-tuned model is initialized from a HuggingFace checkpoint and trained on 8 NVIDIA A100 (80GB) GPUs using Fully Sharded Data Parallel (Zhao et al., 2023). The fine-tuning results are reported in Table 2. Leveraging our high-quality claimevidence train-ing dataset, the fine-tuned Llama-3.1-8B achieves the best performance on both evidence finding and evidence evaluation tasks. These results demon-strate the effectiveness of our data in enhancing model capabilities for hallucination detection. 

5 Related Work 

5.1 Granularity of Hallucinations 

In terms of hallucination-checking granularity, response-level evaluation (Li et al., 2023) deter-mines only whether an entire model output con-tains hallucinations. While such binary judgments suffice for short queries, they become uninforma-tive and often lead to false negatives when halluci-nations occur locally within long-form responses. To achieve finer granularity, prior work (Niu et al., 2023) introduces span-level or word-level halluci-nation annotations, labeling only specific regions of text as hallucinated. However, hallucination-span boundaries are structurally difficult to define, making it challenging to construct high-quality demonstrations for in-context learning. To address these limitations, in PROBE, we propose using claims as the basic unit of hallucination check-ing. Claims provide fine-grained, semantically co-herent, and more clearly separable units of mean-ing. When hallucinated information appears in lengthy LLM responses, evaluating individual ex-tracted claims improves hallucination detection ac-curacy (Akbar et al., 2024). Figure 5 illustrates how claim-level hallucination annotation contrasts with coarser (response-level) and finer but less structured (span-level) alternatives. 

5.2 Hallucination Detection Benchmarks 

With the rise of LLMs, the detection of hallucina-tions has become increasingly challenging, neces-sitating the development of high-quality datasets for LLM evaluation. RAGTruth (Niu et al., 2023) presents a corpus specifically designed for ana-lyzing word/span-level hallucinations in RAG set-tings. Their dataset comprises nearly 18,000 nat-urally generated responses with meticulous man-ual annotations at both response and word levels. The FACTS Grounding Leaderboard (Jacovi et al., 2025) focuses on evaluating models’ ability to gen-erate responses fully grounded in provided context documents while fulfilling users’ requests. This approach uses automated judge models to assess factuality with respect to a given context, though the evaluation remains primarily outcome-focused. HaluBench (Ravi et al., 2024) sources examples from existing benchmarks such as HaluEval (Li et al., 2023) and RAGTruth (Niu et al., 2023), yielding a large collection of model-generated and human-annotated hallucinated samples across di-42309 Table 3: Comparison of PROBE with existing hallucination detection benchmarks. PROBE is the first to provide process-based evaluation at claim-level granularity, enabling detailed diagnosis of detection capabilities.                                           

> Feature PROBE (Ours) RAGTruth FACTS Grounding HaluBench HaluEval FactScore Evaluation Level Claim-level Span-level Response-level Response/Span-level Response-level Claim-level
> Process-Based Yes No No No No No
> Task Diversity Summarization, QA QA, Data-to-Text, Long-form QA QA, Summarization, Biography
> Style Transfer Summarization generation domains Dialogue generation
> Annotation Step-wise Span-level Binary Binary Binary Fact-level
> Scale 12,000 samples 14,289 spans 1,719 examples Large-scale 30,000+ samples 10,000 facts
> (120,404 claims) (17,790 responses)

Figure 5: Comparison of hallucination annotation granularities. Claim-level annotation offers a balance of gran-ularity and structure, overcoming the limitations of coarse response-level and unstructured span-level methods, especially for long-form model responses. 

verse domains. Both FactScore (Min et al., 2023) and LongFact (Wei et al., 2024) propose to de-compose a models response into atomic facts and evaluate the proportion of facts supported by re-liable sources or web search. FastFact (Wan et al., 2025) advances this pipeline by integrating confidence-based pre-verification, significantly re-ducing the cost of web searching. While these benchmarks cover a wide range of domains and annotation granularities, none explicitly evaluate the multi-step process involved in hallucination de-tection. Table 3 presents a detailed comparison be-tween PROBE and existing hallucination detection benchmarks. 

5.3 Process-Based Evaluation 

The importance of process-based evaluation has been recognized across multiple domains. In math-ematical reasoning, PRM800K (Lightman et al., 2023) provides step-wise annotations for model-generated solutions. CriticBench (Lin et al., 2024) evaluates language models’ abilities to critique so-lutions and correct mistakes. MathCheck (Zhou et al., 2024) synthesizes solutions containing er-roneous steps for evaluation purposes. Process-Bench (Zheng et al., 2024) introduces a bench-mark for identifying process errors in mathe-matical reasoning, demonstrating the value of step-wise evaluation for complex reasoning tasks. Their work shows the importance of process super-vision and step-wise evaluation in the reasoning process. Our work falls into this category by pro-viding a structured framework for evaluating each component of the fact-checking process. 

6 Conclusion 

In this paper, we introduce PROBE, a process-based benchmark for evaluating the ability to iden-tify hallucinations in long-form text generation. Unlike prior outcome-based evaluations, PROBE enables an in-depth, step-by-step analysis of LLM capabilities in hallucination detection, providing concrete insights into why models fail to detect hallucinations. Through extensive evaluations on frontier LLMs, we make two key observations: (1) LLMs consistently struggle with evidence finding and evidence evaluation, and (2) step-wise eval-uation achieves superior performance compared to direct prompting. Furthermore, we demon-strate that fine-tuning Llama on PROBE yields 42310 competitive results, suggesting that high-quality supervision can enable the development of spe-cialized models that outperform general-purpose LLMs in process-based hallucination detection. Through PROBE, we aim to establish a new stan-dard for hallucination detection by moving beyond outcome-based metrics toward process-oriented assessment, enabling more transparent and reli-able LLM deployments. 

7 Limitations 

Due to limited computational resources, we do not fine-tune larger LLMs, such as LLaMA-3.1-70B, using PROBE. Moreover, our approach relies on multiple language model invocations to assess hallucination detection, resulting in higher latency compared to direct prompting. This overhead could be partially mitigated through confidence-based pre-selection during evidence finding. Fi-nally, we limit our benchmark to English and non-expert domains, as extending PROBE to other lan-guages or specialized domains (e.g., finance and medicine) would require additional domain exper-tise. Future work could extend PROBE to multi-lingual and domain-specific settings by leveraging suitable multilingual models and domain-specific language models. 

8 Ethical Considerations 

This work is in full compliance with the Ethics Pol-icy of the ACL. We acknowledge that responses generated by LLMs in this study may contain in-accuracies. Aside from this, to the best of our knowledge, there are no additional ethical issues associated with this paper. 

References 

AI@Meta. 2024. Llama 3 model card. Shayan Ali Akbar, Md Mosharaf Hossain, Tess Wood, Si-Chi Chin, Erica M Salinas, Victor Alvarez, and Erwin Cornejo. 2024. Hallumeasure: Fine-grained hallucination measurement using chain-of-thought reasoning. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-ing , pages 15020–15037. Dean Allemang and Juan Sequeda. 2024. Increasing the llm accuracy for question answering: Ontologies to the rescue! arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.11706 .Anthropic. 2025. Introducing claude sonnet 4.5. Sabine Foly, Jingshu Liu, Jean-Gabriel Barthelemy, Gaëtan Caillaut, Raheel Qader, Mariam Nakhle, and Arezki Sadoune. 2025. Clean-wikipedia-english-articles. Xiangkun Hu, Dongyu Ru, Lin Qiu, Qipeng Guo, Tianhang Zhang, Yang Xu, Yun Luo, Pengfei Liu, Yue Zhang, and Zheng Zhang. 2024. Refchecker: Reference-based fine-grained hallucination checker and benchmark for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14486 .Aaron Hurst, Adam Lerer, Adam P Goucher, Adam Perelman, Aditya Ramesh, Aidan Clark, AJ Ostrow, Akila Welihinda, Alan Hayes, Alec Radford, and 1 others. 2024. Gpt-4o system card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21276 .Alon Jacovi, Andrew Wang, Chris Alberti, Connie Tao, Jon Lipovetz, Kate Olszewska, Lukas Haas, Michelle Liu, Nate Keating, Adam Bloniarz, and 1 others. 2025. The facts grounding leaderboard: Benchmarking llms’ ability to ground responses to long-form input. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.03200 .Diederik P Kingma. 2014. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 .Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Hein-rich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rock-täschel, and 1 others. 2020. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Ad-vances in neural information processing systems ,33:9459–9474. Junyi Li, Xiaoxue Cheng, Wayne Xin Zhao, Jian-Yun Nie, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2023. Halueval: A large-scale hallucination evaluation benchmark for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.11747 .Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, Wayne Xin Zhao, Jian-Yun Nie, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2024. Pre-trained language mod-els for text generation: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys , 56(9):1–39. Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yuri Burda, Harri-son Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. 2023. Let’s verify step by step. In The Twelfth Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations .Zicheng Lin, Zhibin Gou, Tian Liang, Ruilin Luo, Haowei Liu, and Yujiu Yang. 2024. Criticbench: Benchmarking llms for critique-correct reasoning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14809 .Sewon Min, Kalpesh Krishna, Xinxi Lyu, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Pang Koh, Mohit Iyyer, Luke Zettle-moyer, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2023. Factscore: Fine-grained atomic evaluation of factual precision in long form text generation. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 12076–12100. 42311 Abhika Mishra, Akari Asai, Vidhisha Balachandran, Yizhong Wang, Graham Neubig, Yulia Tsvetkov, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2024. Fine-grained hallu-cination detection and editing for language models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.06855 .Mistral.ai. 2024. Mixtral-8x22b. Cheng Niu, Yuanhao Wu, Juno Zhu, Siliang Xu, Kashun Shum, Randy Zhong, Juntong Song, and Tong Zhang. 2023. Ragtruth: A hallucination cor-pus for developing trustworthy retrieval-augmented language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.00396 .OpenAI. 2025. gpt-oss-120b & gpt-oss-20b model card. Preprint , arXiv:2508.10925. Selvan Sunitha Ravi, Bartosz Mielczarek, Anand Kan-nappan, Douwe Kiela, and Rebecca Qian. 2024. Lynx: An open source hallucination evaluation model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.08488 .Juntong Song, Xingguang Wang, Juno Zhu, Yuan-hao Wu, Xuxin Cheng, Randy Zhong, and Cheng Niu. 2024. Rag-hat: A hallucination-aware tuning pipeline for llm in retrieval-augmented generation. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: Industry Track , pages 1548–1558. Yingjia Wan, Haochen Tan, Xiao Zhu, Xinyu Zhou, Zhiwei Li, Qingsong Lv, Changxuan Sun, Jiaqi Zeng, Yi Xu, Jianqiao Lu, and 1 others. 2025. Fast-fact: Faster, stronger long-form factuality evalua-tions in llms. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 , pages 23814–23854. Jerry Wei, Chengrun Yang, Xinying Song, Yifeng Lu, Nathan Hu, Jie Huang, Dustin Tran, Daiyi Peng, Ruibo Liu, Da Huang, and 1 others. 2024. Long-form factuality in large language models. Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,37:80756–80827. Yang Zhang, Hanlei Jin, Dan Meng, Jun Wang, and Jinghua Tan. 2024. A comprehensive survey on process-oriented automatic text summarization with exploration of llm-based methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.02901 .Yanli Zhao, Andrew Gu, Rohan Varma, Liang Luo, Chien-Chin Huang, Min Xu, Less Wright, Hamid Shojanazeri, Myle Ott, Sam Shleifer, and 1 oth-ers. 2023. Pytorch fsdp: experiences on scal-ing fully sharded data parallel. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.11277 .Chujie Zheng, Zhenru Zhang, Beichen Zhang, Runji Lin, Keming Lu, Bowen Yu, Dayiheng Liu, Jin-gren Zhou, and Junyang Lin. 2024. Processbench: Identifying process errors in mathematical reason-ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.06559 .Zihao Zhou, Shudong Liu, Maizhen Ning, Wei Liu, Jin-dong Wang, Derek F Wong, Xiaowei Huang, Qi-ufeng Wang, and Kaizhu Huang. 2024. Is your model really a good math reasoner? evaluating math-ematical reasoning with checklist. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.08733 .42312 A Example of Hallucinations 

Base Answer from QAs Q: What are the geographical areas that the term "Siam" is used to refer to, and what is the former name of Thailand? A: The term "Siam" is used to refer to the historical region of Central Thailand, usually including Southern Thailand, as well as other places such as Siam, Ohio, Siam area in Bangkok, and Rue de Siam in Brest, France. The former name of Thailand is Siam. Hallucinated Example with Complexity 1 

Q: What are the geographical areas that the term "Siam" is used to refer to, and what is the former name of Thailand? A: The term "Siam" is used to refer to the historical region of Central Thailand, usually including Southern Thailand, as well as other places such as Siam, Ohio, Siam area in Bangkok, and Rue de Siam in Brest, France. Historically, Siam was also used as a name for a short-lived French colony in Southeast Asia during the 19th century. Hallucinated Example with Complexity 2 

Q: What are the geographical areas that the term "Siam" is used to refer to, and what is the former name of Thailand? A: The term "Siam" is used to refer to the historical region of Central Thailand, usually including Southern Thailand, as well as other places such as Siam, Ohio, Siam area in Bangkok, and Rue de Siam in Brest, France. Additionally, Siam was also used as a name for a short-lived French colony in Southeast Asia during the 19th century. Furthermore, the term "Siam" is also used to refer to a specific region in the southern part of Laos. The former name of Thailand is Siam. Hallucinated Example with Complexity 3 

Q: What are the geographical areas that the term "Siam" is used to refer to, and what is the former name of Thailand? A: The term "Siam" is used to refer to the historical region of Central Thailand, usually including Southern Thailand, as well as other places such as Siam, Ohio, Siam area in Bangkok, and Rue de Siam in Brest, France. Historically, Siam was also used as a name for a short-lived French colony in Southeast Asia during the 19th century. Additionally, the term "Siam" is also used to refer to a specific region in the southern part of Laos. The former name of Thailand is Siam, and interestingly, the name "Siam" was even considered as an alternative name for the country of Cambodia during its independence movement in the mid-20th century. 

> Table 4: Examples of the three types of examples with different level of hallucination.

B Generation Prompt 

The benchmark generation process follows a well-defined pipeline that can be divided into three distinct stages. Here we show the prompt for each step. 

B.1 STAGE 1: Base Content Generation Summarization : LLMs are prompted to produce a concise summary of each source document. 

> Listing 1: Summary Generation System Prompt

You are a helpful assistant that generates a summary of a factual text. Your job is 

↪→ to extract the main facts from the text and present them in a concise 

↪→ manner. You must not hallucinate. You must not make up any facts. You must 

↪→ not use any information that is not in the text. 42313 The summary should be one or a few paragraphs and be detailed -- containing all 

↪→ important names, dates, numbers, or facts about actions taken or events that 

↪→ took place. Do not output any other text than the summary. 

> Listing 2: Summary Generation User Prompt

Summarize the following text: {TEXT} Reminders: - You must not hallucinate. - You must not make up any facts. - You must not use any information that is not in the text. - The summary should be one or a few paragraphs and be detailed -- containing all 

↪→ important names, dates, numbers, or facts about actions taken or events that 

↪→ took place. - Do not output any other text than the summary. 

Question and Answering : We first prompt the language model to generate a question about the provided text that can be answered with a small number (2-4) of concrete facts. The model is then asked to answer each generated question using only the retrieved passages corresponding to the article. 

> Listing 3: Question Generation System Prompt

You are a helpful assistant that generates questions about factual text. Your job 

↪→ is to create a question that requires a brief answer containing only a 

↪→ handful of concrete facts (e.g., one date, one location, and one name, or 

↪→ two dates, etc.). The question should be based on the initial segment of the 

↪→ text and should require an answer that includes 2-4 specific, concrete 

↪→ facts. The question should be specific enough to require only a few factual statements, 

↪→ not long-winded explanations. Do not output any other text than the question. 

↪→

> Listing 4: Question Generation User Prompt

Generate a question about the following text that requires a brief answer with only 

↪→ a handful of concrete facts: {TEXT} Reminders: - The question should require an answer with only 2-4 concrete facts - The question should be based on the initial segment of the text - The answer should include specific facts like dates, locations, names, or numbers - The question should be specific enough to require only a few factual statements - Do not output any other text than the question. 

> Listing 5: Answer Generation System Prompt

You are a helpful assistant that generates brief answers to questions about factual 

↪→ text. Your job is to provide a concise answer that includes only the 

↪→ specific factual claims requested, based on the text. You must not 

↪→ hallucinate. You must not make up any facts. You must not use any 

↪→ information that is not in the text. 42314 The answer should be brief, use simple English, and contain roughly one sentence 

↪→ per fact being asked. Avoid long-winded paragraphs. Do not output any other 

↪→ text than the answer. 

> Listing 6: Answer Generation User Prompt

Answer the following question based on the text: QUESTION: {QUESTION} TEXT: {TEXT} Reminders: - You must not hallucinate. - You must not make up any facts. - You must not use any information that is not in the text. - The answer should be brief, use simple English, and contain roughly one sentence 

↪→ per fact being asked. - Avoid long-winded paragraphs and unnecessary details. - Do not output any other text than the answer. 

Style Transfer : The goal is to rewrite the article in a different style while preserving its meaning. We consider four target styles: blog post, lecture notes, FAQ, and textbook. For each article, one style is selected at random, and the LLM is prompted to rewrite the original Wikipedia text accordingly, yielding approximately 25% of samples in each style category. 

> Listing 7: Blog Post Style Transfer Prompt

You are a helpful assistant that converts Wikipedia articles into engaging blog 

↪→ post style. Your job is to rewrite the factual content in a more 

↪→ conversational, engaging blog post format while preserving all the factual 

↪→ information. You must not hallucinate. You must not make up any facts. You 

↪→ must not use any information that is not in the text. If you cannot fit 

↪→ information into the blog post format naturally, you may omit it, but never 

↪→ make up new information. The blog post should be engaging, conversational, and accessible while maintaining 

↪→ factual accuracy. Use a personal tone, include transitions, and make it 

↪→ readable for a general audience. Do not output any other text than the blog 

↪→ post. ---Convert the following Wikipedia article into an engaging blog post style: {TEXT} Reminders: - You must not hallucinate. - You must not make up any facts. - You must not use any information that is not in the text. - If you cannot fit information into the blog post format naturally, you may omit 

↪→ it, but never make up new information. - The blog post should be engaging, conversational, and accessible while 

↪→ maintaining factual accuracy. - Use a personal tone, include transitions, and make it readable for a general 

↪→ audience. - Do not output any other text than the blog post. 42315 Listing 8: Textbook Style Transfer Prompt 

You are a helpful assistant that converts Wikipedia articles into textbook excerpt 

↪→ style. Your job is to rewrite the factual content in a clear, educational 

↪→ textbook format while preserving all the factual information. You must not 

↪→ hallucinate. You must not make up any facts. You must not use any 

↪→ information that is not in the text. If you cannot fit information into the 

↪→ textbook format naturally, you may omit it, but never make up new 

↪→ information. The textbook excerpt should be clear, well-structured, educational, and suitable 

↪→ for students. Use formal academic language, include clear headings or 

↪→ sections, and present information in a logical, educational manner. Do not 

↪→ output any other text than the textbook excerpt. ----Convert the following Wikipedia article into a clear textbook excerpt style: {TEXT} Reminders: - You must not hallucinate. - You must not make up any facts. - You must not use any information that is not in the text. - If you cannot fit information into the textbook format naturally, you may omit it 

↪→ , but never make up new information. - The textbook excerpt should be clear, well-structured, educational, and suitable 

↪→ for students. - Use formal academic language, include clear headings or sections, and present 

↪→ information in a logical, educational manner. - Do not output any other text than the textbook excerpt. 

> Listing 9: Lecture Notes Style Transfer System Prompt

You are a helpful assistant that converts Wikipedia articles into lecture notes 

↪→ style. Your job is to rewrite the factual content in a concise, note-taking 

↪→ format while preserving all the factual information. You must not 

↪→ hallucinate. You must not make up any facts. You must not use any 

↪→ information that is not in the text. If you cannot fit information into the 

↪→ lecture notes format naturally, you may omit it, but never make up new 

↪→ information. The lecture notes should be concise, well-organized, and easy to follow. Use bullet 

↪→ points, numbered lists, and clear structure. Include key concepts, 

↪→ important dates, and main points in a format suitable for students taking 

↪→ notes. Do not output any other text than the lecture notes. ---Convert the following Wikipedia article into concise lecture notes style: {TEXT} Reminders: - You must not hallucinate. - You must not make up any facts. - You must not use any information that is not in the text. 42316 - If you cannot fit information into the lecture notes format naturally, you may 

↪→ omit it, but never make up new information. - The lecture notes should be concise, well-organized, and easy to follow. - Use bullet points, numbered lists, and clear structure. - Include key concepts, important dates, and main points in a format suitable for 

↪→ students taking notes. - Do not output any other text than the lecture notes. 

> Listing 10: FAQ Style Transfer System Prompt

You are a helpful assistant that converts Wikipedia articles into FAQ (Frequently 

↪→ Asked Questions) format. Your job is to rewrite the factual content as a 

↪→ series of questions and answers while preserving all the factual information. 

↪→ You must not hallucinate. You must not make up any facts. You must not use 

↪→ any information that is not in the text. If you cannot fit information into 

↪→ the FAQ format naturally, you may omit it, but never make up new information. 

↪→

The FAQ should be organized as a series of relevant questions with clear, factual 

↪→ answers. Questions should be natural and cover the main topics from the 

↪→ article. Answers should be concise but informative. Do not output any other 

↪→ text than the FAQ. ---Convert the following Wikipedia article into FAQ (Frequently Asked Questions) 

↪→ format: {TEXT} Reminders: - You must not hallucinate. - You must not make up any facts. - You must not use any information that is not in the text. - If you cannot fit information into the FAQ format naturally, you may omit it, but 

↪→ never make up new information. - The FAQ should be organized as a series of relevant questions with clear, factual 

↪→ answers. - Questions should be natural and cover the main topics from the article. - Answers should be concise but informative. - Do not output any other text than the FAQ. 

B.2 STAGE 2: Hallucination Insertion 

To precisely control hallucination locations, we generate unfaithful hallucinations by synthetically inject-ing poisoned semantics into the text. 

> Listing 11: Hallucination Invention System Prompt for Summaries

You are an adversarial assistant that invents new facts about a text. Your job is 

↪→ to invent {NEW_FACT_COUNT} new facts about the text that are not in the text 

↪→ (and are not a logical consequence of any information in the text) but are 

↪→ plausible or believable. The facts should be formulated as statements that 

↪→ can be evaluated as true or false. Do not output any text other than the 

↪→ facts separated by newlines. 42317 Listing 12: Hallucination Invention User Prompt for Summaries 

Invent {NEW_FACT_COUNT} new facts about the following text. Output the facts 

↪→ separated by newlines -- each fact should be one a single line. Do not 

↪→ output any other text than the facts separated by newlines. {TEXT} Reminders: - The facts should be formulated as statements that can be evaluated as true or 

↪→ false. - The facts should be plausible or believable. - The facts should not be in the text or be a logical consequence of any 

↪→ information in the text. - Do not output any other text than the facts separated by newlines. 

> Listing 13: Answer Editor System Prompt

You are a helpful assistant that edits an answer to include new facts that are 

↪→ provided. Your job is to edit the answer in such a way that it includes new 

↪→ facts that are provided and are not in the original answer. The inclusion of 

↪→ these new facts must be seamless and natural, and should appear across the 

↪→ whole text rather than just being added at the end. Keep the answer brief 

↪→ and simple, with roughly one sentence per fact. Do not output any other text 

↪→ than the edited answer. Do not hallucinate = do not make up any new facts. 

↪→ You must use only the original answer text and the newly provided facts. 

> Listing 14: Answer Editor User Prompt

Edit the following ANSWER to include the NEW FACTS that are provided. The inclusion 

↪→ of these new facts must be seamless and natural, and should appear across 

↪→ the whole text rather than just being added at the end. Keep the answer 

↪→ brief and simple, with roughly one sentence per fact. Do not output any 

↪→ other text than the edited answer. Do not hallucinate. Do not make up any 

↪→ new facts. You must use only the original ANSWER text and the newly provided 

↪→ facts. ANSWER: {ANSWER} NEW FACTS: {FACTS} Reminders: - The inclusion of these new facts must be seamless and natural, and should appear 

↪→ across the whole text rather than just being added at the end. - Keep the answer brief and simple, with roughly one sentence per fact asked. - Do not output any other text than the edited answer. - Do not hallucinate = do not make up any new facts. - You must use only the original answer text and the newly provided facts. - Try not to leave out any information from the original answer text. 

B.3 STAGE 3: Claim-Evidence Pair Generation Step 1 : Claim Decomposition. 42318 Listing 15: Claim decomposition prompt 

You are AssertionDecomposer, a helpful text processing assistant that takes a text 

↪→ and returns a detailed list of all assertions that the text makes, no matter 

↪→ how small. The TEXT you are given is an output of generation, e.g., an informed answer to a 

↪→ question, a summary/essay/report on a document or a piece of text, a 

↪→ modification of a text including some stylistic changes, etc.. You can 

↪→ assume that the TEXT you will be given is the output of a generation based 

↪→ on some information sources that have been provided in order to produce the 

↪→ TEXT. Your job is to find all assertions that the TEXT (including its section headings, 

↪→ tables, figure captions, or other non-textual elements) makes, no matter how 

↪→ small, taking particular care to note down all facts that the text makes 

↪→ including any numbers, dates, names, or claims about something happening. 

↪→ You will then output a list of assertions in the following Markdown-inspired 

↪→ format: > SEGMENT#1 Assertion of a fact formulated from SEGMENT#1. > SEGMENT#2 Assertion of a fact formulated from SEGMENT#2. ... 

Step 2 : Evidence Finding 

> Listing 16: Evidence finding prompt

Find segments/sentences in the ground truth source that are relevant to the 

↪→ assertion, i.e., that support, contradict, or are otherwise directly 

↪→ relevant to the assertion. Think step by step, then produce your final 

↪→ output by marking it with "FINAL OUTPUT:". <ASSERTION> {ASSERTION} </ASSERTION> <GROUND_TRUTH_SOURCE> {GROUND_TRUTH_SOURCE} </GROUND_TRUTH_SOURCE> Output format: Thinking: [Your thinking] FINAL OUTPUT: Segment #1 ... 

Step 3 : Evidence Evaluation 

> Listing 17: Evidence evaluation prompt

Evaluate whether the following evidence supports the given assertion. ASSERTION: 42319 {ASSERTION} EVIDENCE EXCERPT: {EVIDENCE} SURROUNDING CONTEXT: {SURROUNDING_CONTEXT} Please analyze whether the evidence excerpt ALONE supports the assertion. Provide 

↪→ your reasoning and then give a clear PASS or FAIL verdict. The analysis must 

↪→ rely on the evidence, not the context. The context is informative to help 

↪→ you better understand the assertion and the evidence, but it is not a crutch 

↪→ to justify the assertion from which to make far-stretching logical leaps. 

↪→ When reasoning, do not rely on any statements in the context to make your 

↪→ case. Use the context only to enhance your understanding of the assertion 

↪→ and the evidence, and never to justify the assertion. REASONING: [Your analysis here relying on the evidence alone] VERDICT: [PASS or FAIL] 42320