Title: Detecting Hallucinations in Retrieval-Augmented Generation through Grounding-Aware Sensitivity by Perturbation (GASP)

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.04223v1

Published Time: Tue, 07 Jul 2026 02:38:24 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
> Research Article Bouke, 2026

# Detecting Hallucinations in Retrieval-Augmented Generation through Grounding-Aware Sensitivity by Perturbation (GASP) 

Mohamed Aly Bouke #1,*  

> 1Centre for Intelligent Cloud Computing, CoE for Advanced Cloud, Faculty of Information Science and Technology, Multimedia University, Jalan Ayer Keroh Lama, Bukit Beruang, 75450, Melaka, Malaysia
> *bouke@ieee.org, alybouke@mmu.edu.my
> Research Article , July 7, 2026

Abstract 

Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) reduces but does not eliminate hallucination, and existing detectors return a single answer-level score that does not indicate which sentence is unsupported, or why. To close this gap, we introduce Grounding-Aware Sensitivity by Perturbation (GASP), a span-level detector that scores each answer sentence by how strongly its likelihood depends on the retrieved evidence, a quantity we term grounding sensitivity. GASP holds the answer fixed and re-scores it under the full context, under no context, and with each chunk removed, then measures the log-likelihood drops and Jensen-Shannon divergences (JSD). The likelihood of a grounded sentence collapses once its supporting passage is removed, whereas a hallucinated sentence is almost unaffected, a contrast we interpret by casting decoding as a random nonlinear iterated function system (RNIFS). We evaluate GASP on three benchmarks (RAGTruth, TofuEval, RAGBench) with three instruction-tuned scorers from two model families (Qwen2.5-0.5B, Qwen2.5-1.5B, and SmolLM2-1.7B) under a leakage-clean protocol. On RAGTruth it reaches a response-level area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve (AUC) of about 0.73 and a span-level AUC of about 0.67 ,improving significantly over perplexity and by clear margins over length, whole-context natural language inference (NLI), and self-consistency baselines. The only baseline competitive at the span level is a well-configured chunk-level entailment verifier, which requires a separate model, whereas a training-free threshold on the grounding features matches the trained classifier without labeled data and serves as the default detector. Beyond RAGTruth, the signal transfers to TofuEval but not to short-answer question answering in RAGBench, showing GASP is best suited to outputs constructed from the retrieved context rather than answers recoverable from parametric knowledge. 

Keywords: hallucination detection, retrieval-augmented generation, context perturbation, explainable AI, large language models 

1 Introduction 

Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly deployed with RAG, where a retriever supplies passages that the model condi-tions on when answering a query [1]. Grounding generation in retrieved evidence narrows the gap between what a model as-serts and what can be verified, and it has become the dominant pattern for question answering, summarization, and assistant systems in knowledge-intensive settings. Retrieval injects up-to-date and domain-specific information that a fixed parametric model cannot hold, and it offers a route to attribution, since each claim can in principle be traced to a retrieved passage. The pattern is now spreading into settings where the cost of an error is high, such as clinical decision support, legal research, and financial analysis, which raises the stakes of any unsupported statement the system produces and calls for checking grounding at the level of the individual claim. Yet retrieval does not remove the core failure of generative models. They continue to produce fluent statements that the supplied evidence does not support, a phenomenon usually called hallucination [2], [3]. The model remains free to blend its parametric prior with the retrieved text, to over-generalize from a partial match, or to contradict a passage it has nominally read. A single unsupported sentence that reads as confidently as a true one can cause real harm. Consider a clinical assistant that retrieves passages from a drug formulary and answers a dosing question. If one sentence states a dose that no retrieved passage supports, the answer as a whole may still read as authoritative, and a busy clinician may not catch the single unsupported clause. The practical question is therefore not only whether an answer is trustworthy as a whole, but which specific parts of it are unsupported, and why. Two limitations constrain hallucination detectors in practice. The first is granularity and transparency. Most detectors return one score for an entire answer, so a reviewer learns that the answer might be unreliable but not which sentence is unsup-ported, nor why it was flagged. A response-level score is poorly matched to how people verify text, since verification proceeds claim by claim. The second limitation concerns the signal it-self. A natural first attempt is to read intrinsic properties of the generated text, such as its perplexity or token-level uncertainty, and to treat unusual values as evidence of hallucination. The difficulty is that an unsupported sentence can be as fluent and internally ordinary as a true one, so intrinsic signals measure how the model writes, not whether what it writes is supported. The central observation of this work is that hallucination is a property of the relationship between a sentence and its ev-idence, not of the sentence in isolation. A faithful sentence is constructed from a particular passage and depends on it, so its plausibility to the model collapses if that passage is re-moved, whereas a hallucinated sentence is produced from the  

> Page 1 of 23
> arXiv:2607.04223v1 [cs.CL] 5 Jul 2026 Research Article Bouke, 2026

model prior and is unchanged by the removal. We turn this into a measurable signal by perturbing the retrieved context and observing how much each answer span reacts. We give the signal a dynamical-systems reading by viewing decoding under a context as an RNIFS whose attractor is the set of grounded continuations, so that grounding sensitivity is how strongly that attractor reacts to perturbations of the evidence that defines it. This reading connects the detector to the theory of how an invariant measure responds to perturbation and clarifies why a measure-theoretic distance, rather than a surface text statistic, is the right instrument. A practical consequence of testing grounding by perturbation is that the detector is cheap and self-contained. It needs only the ability to score a fixed answer under a few variants of the context, which a small model provides, so it adds no separate verifier to maintain and no resampling of the answer. The one requirement is access to a probabilistic scorer that can return token likelihoods under a given context. This scorer can be a different and smaller model than the one that produced the answer, which lets the same guardrail audit a large or hosted generator whose internals are unavailable, though it does not ap-ply to a generator that exposes neither its own log-probabilities nor a stand-in scorer. The objective of this paper is to design and evaluate a span-level RAG hallucination detector that scores each answer sen-tence by its grounding sensitivity and that returns, for each flag, the context unit that best supports the span as an explana-tion. We require the detector to outperform perplexity, length, and whole-context entailment, and to be at least competitive with a well-configured chunk-level entailment verifier, under a leakage-clean evaluation that prevents sentences from the same answer from appearing in both training and test folds. The intended use is an explainable guardrail and audit tool for RAG assistants, where a reviewer or an automated filter sees, for each sentence, whether it is anchored in the retrieved evidence, sees the supporting passage when it is, and receives an alert when a sentence is anchored in nothing. The main contributions of this paper are as follows. 1. We develop GASP, a span-level RAG hallucination detec-tor that scores each sentence by its grounding sensitivity, the change in the sentence likelihood when the retrieved context is perturbed. 2. We provide a training-free threshold-only variant that requires no labeled data. 3. We provide an attribution mechanism that returns a can-didate supporting passage for each sentence at no extra cost, and evaluate it against NLI and lexical controls. 4. We evaluate the detector under a leakage-clean protocol across three benchmarks (RAGTruth, TofuEval, RAG-Bench) and three scorers from two families, with con-fidence intervals, significance tests, and ablations, and map where the signal does and does not transfer. 5. As a supporting interpretation, we cast decoding as an RNIFS and bound the movement of its invariant measure by the divergence the detector reads, testing this on the hidden states. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related work and positions the contribution. Section 3 presents preliminaries. Section 4 formalizes the task. Section 5 presents the method. Section 6 describes the experimental setup, Section 7 reports the detection results, and Section 8 presents the analysis and diagnostics. Section 9 discusses interpretation and use, Section 10 examines threats to validity, and Section 11 considers ethical use. Section 12 concludes, and Section 13 discusses limitations and future work. 

2 Related Work  

> 2.1 Intrinsic and uncertainty-based detection

A first family of detectors reads signals from the model itself, including token probability, perplexity, and uncertainty esti-mates such as semantic entropy that aggregate over meaning-equivalent generations [4]. A recent line reads the model in-ternal states, since hidden activations appear to retain informa-tion about whether an output is hallucinated [5], and related work mines attention and probability statistics for the same purpose [6]. These methods require no external resources and run during or after generation. Their weakness is that fluency and confidence are weak proxies for grounding, since a model can be fluent and confident about an unsupported statement and uncertain about a correct but rare phrasing. Calibration com-pounds the problem, because instruction tuning and decoding choices shift the probabilities, so a fixed threshold transfers badly across models and prompts. These signals describe the model state rather than the evidence, which leaves a gap for detectors that test grounding directly and at the granularity of an individual claim. Uncertainty methods that aggregate over meaning-equivalent samples mitigate part of the calibration is-sue, but at the cost of several generations per answer, and they report a quantity that is still about the distribution of model outputs rather than about the relationship between an output and the retrieved evidence. The persistent gap is a signal that is both grounding-aware and localized.  

> 2.2 Sampling-consistency detection

A second family samples several generations for the same prompt and treats disagreement among them as evidence of hallucination, as in SelfCheckGPT [7]. Consistency is infor-mative when a model is internally unsure, and the approach is black-box and needs no labeled data. The signal is computed, however, by perturbing the output through resampling rather than by perturbing the grounding, and it needs several gener-ations per answer, which multiplies the inference budget. A model can be confidently and consistently wrong, repeating the same unsupported claim across samples, so the unanswered question remains whether the answer depends on the supplied evidence. The agreement is also usually scored by surface com-parison at the response or sentence level, which couples the detector to a text-similarity model and inherits its blind spots, and it does not by itself indicate which passage should have supported a flagged sentence. The resampling view and the context-perturbation view are in fact complementary, since one probes the stability of the output under the model own stochas-ticity while the other probes the dependence of the output on the external evidence, and the two answer different questions.  

> Page 2 of 23 Research Article Bouke, 2026

A complete trustworthy generation stack might use both, but for the specific question of whether an answer is grounded in the retrieved passages, perturbing the grounding is the more direct test, and it is the one that also yields the supporting passage as a byproduct.  

> 2.3 Entailment and fact verification

A third family checks whether the answer is entailed by the con-text using NLI models or fact-verification pipelines, including fine-grained scoring that decomposes a response into atomic facts and verifies each [8]. These methods target grounding directly, which is the right objective, but they depend on a sep-arate verification model whose domain and granularity may not match the target setting, and entailment over long, multi-sentence context is brittle. Their effectiveness is bounded by the quality and transfer of the auxiliary model, which leaves room for a signal computed by the scoring model itself without a separate verifier. The objectives also diverge in deployment, since an external verifier must be maintained, versioned, and matched to the domain of the system it audits, whereas a signal derived from the generator scales with the system and requires no second model to keep current. Decomposition into atomic facts improves localization but multiplies the number of verifier calls, which is costly to run on every answer in production. There is also a representational mismatch, since an entailment model trained on short premise and hypothesis pairs is asked here to judge a long multi-passage premise against a sentence drawn from a longer answer, and its calibration on this out-of-distribution input is uncertain. Retrieval-grounded answers frequently paraphrase, aggregate, or partially restate several passages, and an off-the-shelf verifier may score such faithful aggregation as only weakly entailed while scoring a fluent but unsupported sentence on the same topic as plausibly entailed, which is the opposite of what a grounding detector needs. These difficulties are not arguments against entailment in principle, but they explain why a grounding signal read from the genera-tor, which does not project the problem onto a separate model trained for a different task, complements it.  

> 2.4 Context attribution and ablation

A fourth family ablates context sources to attribute a generation to the passages that produced it, as in ContextCite [9], and a broader methodological thread analyzes models by leave-one-out input ablation and counterfactual edits. A closely related recent method reads attention from the answer back to the con-text and flags a contextual hallucination when too little attention falls on the retrieved passages [10], but attention indicates where the model looks rather than whether the output would change if a passage were gone, so it is a correlational rather than a counterfactual signal. A further mechanistic line pursues the same context-versus-knowledge question by reading the gener-ator’s internal state directly. ReDeEP attributes a hallucination to knowledge feed-forward modules that overweight parametric memory and to copying attention heads that fail to carry the retrieved evidence forward [11], and LUMINA pairs a distribu-tional measure of external-context use with a layer-wise trace of how the predicted token evolves inside the model [12]. These signals are informative, yet they are read from the model’s activations, so they require white-box access to the generator and describe the mechanism correlationally rather than testing dependence directly. The ablation strand, by contrast, estab-lishes that responses depend on identifiable sources and that removing them changes the output, which is the causal lever we use. It is framed as attribution, however, with the goal of crediting sources for a generation assumed worth citing, rather than as a detector that uses the absence of such dependence to flag content as unsupported. Attribution is content with a ranking of sources, whereas detection must decide whether any passage supports a span at all and convert the ablation effect into a calibrated decision across spans, so a method tuned for the first is not automatically a detector for the second. The de-tection reading also calls for a principled readout of the ablation effect. A change in a single realized token probability is noisy, whereas a divergence between the full predictive distributions is more stable and admits the measure-theoretic interpretation we develop, in which the ablation moves a context-conditioned in-variant measure by an amount that reflects the span dependence on the removed unit.  

> 2.5 Faithfulness and dynamical systems

Work on summarization faithfulness establishes that faithfulness is distinct from fluency and is best assessed at a fine granularity, and it provides span-annotated corpora and atomic-fact proto-cols [8], [13]. These metrics are typically computed by an exter-nal judge and are designed to score a finished summary rather than to provide a cheap, self-contained signal, a pattern contin-ued by automated retrieval-augmented evaluation suites [14] and by recent retrieval-augmented hallucination detectors that train a dedicated judging model [15]. Separately, work on generative and symbolic processes as dynamical systems char-acterizes their attractors and stability, including RNIFS and their dimensional properties [16]. This perspective supplies a vocabulary of invariant measures and stability under perturba-tion that has not been connected to the practical problem of deciding whether a generated span is grounded.  

> 2.6 Positioning

Across these threads a single need emerges. Intrinsic and sam-pling methods do not test grounding, entailment methods import a separate and brittle verifier, context-ablation methods estab-lish dependence but read it as attribution rather than detection, mechanistic methods infer context reliance from the genera-tor’s internal state and so require white-box access to it, and the dynamical-systems perspective offers stability tools that have not been applied to grounding. The present work sits at this intersection. We use context perturbation as a detection signal, we compute it from a probabilistic scorer, which need not be the model that produced the answer, without a separate trained verifier, and we interpret it through the stability of a context-conditioned invariant measure. The contribution is not a new model but a new reading of an existing causal lever, since context ablation is already known to change a generation, and the present work shows that the magnitude of that change, measured as a movement of a context-conditioned invariant measure and aggregated to the span, is a usable and explain-able hallucination signal that needs no auxiliary verifier and no resampling. Table 1 places grounding sensitivity among these families, where it is set apart by reading a counterfactual con- 

> Page 3 of 23 Research Article Bouke, 2026

Table 1: Qualitative comparison of hallucination-detection families along the axes that matter for grounded, explainable detection, with a representative method for each family.                                            

> Family Signal source What is perturbed Granularity Separate verifier Built-in explanation Example methods Intrinsic /uncer-tainty token probability, en-tropy nothing response or token no no semantic entropy, IN-SIDE [4], [5] Sampling consis-tency agreement of sam-ples the output (resam-pling) response or sen-tence no no SelfCheckGPT [7] Entailment /fact check external NLI or veri-fier nothing sentence or fact yes partial FActScore [8] Trained detector supervised classifier nothing span or token yes partial LettuceDetect [15] Context attribution change under abla-tion the context (sources) source attribution no yes ContextCite [9] Mechanistic / inter-nal state attention, FFN acti-vations nothing response or token no partial Lookback Lens, Re-DeEP, LUMINA [10], [11], [12]
> GASP change under abla-tion the context (chunks) response and span no yes this work

text perturbation at the span level and returning the supporting passage with its decision, rather than relying on an intrinsic score, a resampling test, or a separate verifier. 

3 Preliminaries 

3.1 RAG and hallucination 

In RAG, a query q is used to retrieve a set of context passages 

c, and an answer y is generated by an autoregressive model conditioned on q and c. The intent is that every claim in y

should be entailed by c, and hallucination is the violation of this intent. It is useful to separate two notions that are easily con-flated. Factuality asks whether a statement is true in the world, which requires a trusted external source to judge, while faith-fulness, or grounding, asks whether a statement is supported by the specific evidence the system was given. In RAG the operative contract is grounding, since the system promises to answer from the retrieved passages, so grounding is our target. Concretely, the benchmark we use separates two grounding fail-ures whose relation to the context differs. Baseless information introduces details absent from the evidence, and evident conflict contradicts the evidence. A baseless claim has no anchor in the evidence, whereas a conflicting claim engages a specific passage only to assert the opposite, which motivates analyzing the two separately. Surveys further organize hallucination by whether it conflicts with the input, with world knowledge, or with the model own earlier output, and a recurring theme is that the phenomenon is best studied at a fine granularity, since a response-level judgment hides which claim is at fault [2], [3]. Reliable progress also depends on benchmarks. Early re-sources annotated only whether a whole answer was faithful, which restricts both training and evaluation to the response level, while more recent resources annotate the offending spans and their type, which is what enables the span-level detection and per-type analysis we pursue [13]. Independent of the bench-mark, trust in a detector depends on whether its decisions can be inspected, so an explanation that points to the missing or supporting evidence matters, especially where a person must sign off on the output. 

3.2 Language modeling and perplexity 

An autoregressive language model factorizes the probability of an answer y given a context c as a product of per-token conditionals, p(y | c) = ∏t p(yt | y<t , c), where each conditional is a softmax over the vocabulary. The perplexity of an answer is the exponential of the mean surprisal, PPL (y | c) = exp 



− 1 

> |y|

# ∑

> t

log p(yt | y<t , c)



, (1) and it is the intrinsic baseline most often proposed for hallucina-tion detection. However, perplexity underdetermines grounding. An unsupported sentence that is well written and consistent with the topic of the context is probable to the model and therefore has low perplexity even though no passage supports it, and a faithful sentence that paraphrases a passage unusually can have high perplexity while being fully grounded. Perplexity mea-sures probability under one context and cannot see whether that probability came from the evidence or from the prior, which is the tie our method breaks by comparing probabilities across contexts. The same limitation applies to per-token variants of the signal, such as the variance of surprisal across a sentence, which captures how uneven the model confidence is but still reads a single context. These intrinsic statistics can correlate with hallucination in datasets where unsupported content hap-pens to be less fluent, but the correlation is incidental and does not survive when an unsupported sentence is written fluently, which is precisely the case that matters in a deployed system whose generator is competent. A grounding signal must there-fore compare behavior across contexts, and the comparison must be made at the granularity of the claim, since a fluent answer can mix grounded and ungrounded sentences whose average surprisal looks unremarkable. 

3.3 RNIFS and invariant measures 

An RNIFS is a finite family of maps {Fw}w∈V applied in a stochastic sequence with selection probabilities {πw}. When the maps are contractions and the selection is suitably regular,  

> Page 4 of 23 Research Article Bouke, 2026

the induced sequence of distributions converges to a unique invariant measure μ that satisfies the self-consistency relation 

μ = ∑

> w∈V

πw (Fw)∗ μ, (2) where (Fw)∗μ is the pushforward of μ through Fw. Existence and uniqueness follow from a fixed point argument on the space of probability measures, in the spirit of the Banach fixed point theorem applied to the Markov operator on the right of Eq. (2) .The relevant property for our purposes is stability, the way the invariant measure responds to perturbation of the selection probabilities. The RNIFS framework characterizes this stability for nonlinear maps with stochastic selection, together with the dimensional structure of the resulting attractors [16]. The property we rely on is qualitative rather than a specific bound. When a perturbation of the selection probabilities is localized, in the sense that it changes the weights only where a removed component was influential, the invariant measure changes only on the corresponding region of the state space and is left close to its original form elsewhere. This locality is what allows a single global perturbation, the removal of one context unit, to produce a localized effect that can be attributed to the parts of the output that depended on that unit, and it is the formal counterpart of the intuition that taking away a passage should disturb the sentences built on it and leave the rest alone. The same body of theory characterizes the geometric complexity of these attractors, for example through their fractal dimension, and shows that the dimension and the stability respond in a controlled way to the parameters of the system [16]. We do not use the dimensional results directly here, but they are the reason we expect the response to a perturbation to be both measurable and structured rather than chaotic, which is the assumption underlying a detector that reads the size of that response. We bring this machinery to bear on grounding by treating the retrieved context as the component whose removal perturbs the system and reading the induced movement of the invariant measure as the grounding signal.  

> 3.4 Divergence and evaluation

We compare two predictive distributions P and Q over the vo-cabulary using the JSD, JSD (P ∥ Q) = 12 KL (P ∥ M) + 12 KL (Q ∥ M), M = 12 (P+Q),

(3) where KL is the Kullback-Leibler divergence. JSD is sym-metric, bounded, and finite even when supports differ, which makes it a stable measure of how far a predictive distribution moves when the conditioning context changes. We prefer it to the KL divergence alone, which is asymmetric and can di-verge when one distribution assigns near-zero probability to a token the other supports, a situation that arises routinely when removing a passage sharply changes the plausible next tokens. The boundedness of JSD also fixes the scale of the divergence features, which we use later to argue that a single operating threshold transfers across answers. For the decision rule, we map the resulting features to a hallucination score with a gradient-boosted decision tree classifier, implemented with LightGBM [17], which fits an additive ensemble of shallow trees by stage-wise optimization of a differentiable loss. Such a classifier suits the small, heterogeneous, possibly nonlinear tabular feature set we construct, needs no feature scaling, and exposes feature importances, which keeps the detector light and interpretable. We evaluate detection as binary classification at the response and span levels and report the AUC, which is threshold-free, together with the ROC curve. The AUC mea-sures the probability that a randomly chosen hallucinated in-stance receives a higher score than a randomly chosen grounded one, so it summarizes the quality of the ranking without commit-ting to a threshold and is insensitive to the class prior, which is convenient when the evaluation set is balanced for measurement but the deployment stream is not. The ROC curve complements the single number by showing the full trade-off between the true positive rate and the false positive rate, which is what a practitioner consults when choosing an operating point for a given review budget. Separately, span instances from the same answer are dependent, so an evaluation that mixes them across folds leaks information and inflates scores. A leakage-clean protocol must group folds by answer, a discipline that connects to the wider problem of data leakage inflating reported perfor-mance in machine learning pipelines, where information from the test set reaches training through preprocessing, resampling, or grouping, and where the inflation is invisible unless the proto-col is designed to prevent it. The effect is easy to underestimate, since spans from one answer share lexical style, length, and the same context, so a classifier that has seen some spans of an answer can recognize the rest, and an ungrouped split would report a score that reflects this recognition rather than genuine detection. Table 2 summarizes the notation. 

4 Problem Formulation 

We are given a corpus of retrieval-augmented instances, each a triple (q, c, y) of a query, a retrieved context, and a generated answer, together with human span-level hallucination annota-tions. The context is partitioned into units c = {s1, . . . , sK }, and the answer is segmented into sentence spans y = ( y1, . . . , ym)

with known character offsets. A labeling function assigns to each span a binary label Y j ∈ { 0, 1}, where Y j = 1 when the span overlaps a human-annotated hallucination, and a type 

τ j ∈ { baseless , conflict , none } taken from the overlapping an-notation. The response label is Y = max j Y j.A detector is a scoring function f that maps an instance to a real number, with higher scores indicating greater suspicion of hallucination, instantiated as a response-level detector f (q, c, y)

and a span-level detector f (q, c, y j). Note the direction conven-tion that we rely on throughout. The raw grounding-sensitivity features of Section 5 increase with evidence dependence, so they are larger for grounded spans. The final hallucination score 

f is therefore defined after a monotone inversion, either learned by the classifier or imposed by negating the standardized feature sum, so that a higher f always means lower grounding. The objective is to rank hallucinated instances above grounded ones, measured by the AUC, AUC ( f ) = Pr  f (u+) > f (u−), (4) for a positive instance u+ and a negative instance u− drawn at random from the two classes. Because spans from one response are dependent, estimating Eq. (4) at the span level must keep  

> Page 5 of 23 Research Article Bouke, 2026

Table 2: Notation used throughout the paper. 

Symbol Meaning 

q, c, y query, retrieved context, generated answer 

sk the k-th context chunk, c = S 

> k

sk

c \ sk context with chunk k removed 

∅ empty (no) context 

K number of context chunks 

y j, m the j-th answer span and the number of spans in y

|y| number of tokens in span yY j, Y span and response hallucination labels, 

Y = max j Y j

τ j hallucination type of span j (baseless, con-flict, none) 

f hallucination score; a higher value is more suspicious 

ℓc, ℓ ∅, ℓ (k) answer log-likelihood under c, under no context, and with chunk k removed 

pct predictive distribution at step t under c

> jsd ∅

, jsd loo no-context and leave-one-out divergence features 

ht , T model hidden state at step t; decoding tem-perature 

A, V answer length; vocabulary size 

πw(·) next-token selection probability 

Fw, Tc token update map; context-conditioned transfer operator 

μc invariant measure under context c

H space of hidden states JSD Jensen-Shannon divergence 

W1, TV Wasserstein-1 and total variation dis-tances ¯L, D average contraction modulus; one-step spread of the maps 

all spans of a response on the same side of every split, which is the leakage-clean constraint we adopt. The task is to design 

f so that it ranks well under this constraint and to make each decision explainable, showing for a flagged span the absence of a high-impact supporting unit and for a grounded span the candidate supporting unit its likelihood most depends on. 

5 Method 

5.1 Decoding as a context-conditioned RNIFS 

Let the model maintain a hidden state ht as it generates, and let the retrieved context c shape the next-token distribution through the logits zw(ht ),

πw(ht ; c) = exp  zw(ht ; c)/T 

∑w′ exp  zw′ (ht ; c)/T  , (5) with temperature T . Sampling a token w and updating the state is a map ht+1 = Fw(ht ) on the reachable state set 

H ⊆ Rd , so generation under c is a place-dependent RNIFS 

{(Fw, πw(·; c)) }w∈V whose selection probabilities in Eq. (5) de-pend on c. Its distribution over states evolves under the Markov transfer operator 

(Tc ν)( ·) = ∑

> w∈V

Z

> H

πw(h; c) δFw(h)(·) dν(h), (6) whose fixed point is the invariant measure μc of Eq. (2) , which we call the attractor of grounded continuations. We make the stability the method relies on explicit through the standard average-contraction condition for such systems. 

Assumption 1 (Average contraction and regular selection) . Let D = sup h∈H max w,w′ ∥Fw(h) − Fw′ (h)∥ be the one-step spread of the maps. There are constants ℓ and κ such that, uniformly over h, h′ ∈ H and over the contexts considered, the maps con-tract on average, ∑w∈V πw(h; c) Lip (Fw) ≤ ℓ, and the selection distribution is Lipschitz in the state, TV  π(h; c), π(h′; c) ≤

κ ∥h − h′∥, with combined modulus ¯L := ℓ + Dκ < 1. Here 

Lip (Fw) is the Lipschitz constant of Fw on H and TV is the total variation distance. 

This is the place-dependent form of contractivity, extended to nonlinear maps with stochastic selection by the RNIFS analy-sis [16]. The first condition makes the maps contract on average, and the second keeps the selection probabilities from changing too abruptly across nearby states, so that a place-dependent edit cannot destabilize the operator. Together they make the transfer operator a contraction, and under them the attractor exists, is unique, and moves by no more than the perturbation a context edit induces, which is exactly the property the detector reads. 

Proposition 1 (Attractor movement is controlled by the mea-sured divergence) . Under Assumption 1, Tc is a contraction of modulus ¯L on the probability measures over H under the Wasserstein-1 distance W1, so a unique invariant measure μc

exists. Moreover, for any context edit c → c \ s, W1

 μc, μc\s

 ≤ D

1 − ¯L sup 

> h∈H

TV  π(h; c), π(h; c \ s)

≤ D

1 − ¯L sup 

> h∈H

q

2 JSD  π(h; c) ∥ π(h; c \ s),

(7) 

with D the one-step spread and TV the total variation as in Assumption 1. Proof sketch. Contractivity of Tc under W1 follows from the place-dependent Hutchinson argument. For states h, h′, cou-pling the images Tcδh and Tcδh′ through the shared token index moves the matched mass by at most Lip (Fw)∥h − h′∥

per component and, where the two selection distributions disagree, transports mass across atoms at most D apart, so W1(Tcδh, Tcδh′ ) ≤ ℓ∥h − h′∥ + D TV (π(h; c), π(h′; c)) ≤

(ℓ + Dκ)∥h − h′∥ = ¯L∥h − h′∥ by Assumption 1. Extend-ing to general ν, ν′ through an optimal coupling gives 

W1(Tcν, Tcν′) ≤ ¯LW 1(ν, ν′), so a unique fixed point μc exists by the Banach theorem. Both fixed points satisfy μ = T μ,so W1(μc, μc\s) ≤ W1(Tcμc, Tcμc\s) + W1(Tcμc\s, Tc\sμc\s) ≤         

> Page 6 of 23 Research Article Bouke, 2026
> Inputs: the question, the retrieved sources, and the AI answer to check
> Split the sources into pieces
> Re-read with all sources, and record the token likelihoods and predictive distributions
> Re-read with no sources, and record the token likelihoods and predictive distributions
> Re-read with one piece removed at a time, and record the token likeli-hoods and predictive distributions
> Measure likelihood drops and distribution shifts from the all-sources reading when sources are removed
> Combine the drops for each sentence
> Turn the combined drops into a grounding-sensitivity score for each sentence
> Does the sentence show high grounding sensitivity?
> Supported
> show the source it relies on
> Unsupported
> flag as a likely hallucination
> yes no

Figure 1: Overview of GASP. A fixed answer is re-scored under the full context, under no context, and under each retrieved chunk removed in turn. The resulting per-sentence grounding-sensitivity score marks each sentence as supported, with its supporting source, or as a likely hallucination. 

¯LW 1(μc, μc\s) + sup ν W1(Tcν, Tc\sν), which rearranges to the factor 1/(1 − ¯L). The one-step gap sup ν W1(Tcν, Tc\sν) ≤

sup h W1(Tcδh, Tc\sδh) compares two mixtures on the same atoms {Fw(h)} with weights π(h; c) and π(h; c \ s), so it is at most D TV (π(h; c), π(h; c \ s)) . The last inequality is the Pinsker bound applied to each half of the JSD, giving TV ≤√2 JSD in nats. Proposition 1 formalizes the intuition behind the signal under an idealized setting. The movement of the attractor under a con-text edit is bounded by the per-step JSD between the selection distributions, the very quantity Eqs. (9) and (11) estimate at the realized answer positions, amplified by the stability factor 1/(1− ¯L). A grounded span sits where a specific edit makes this divergence large, so its attractor moves and its likelihood falls, whereas a free-running span sits where every edit leaves the selection distribution, and hence the attractor, nearly fixed. The likelihood features of Eqs. (8) and (10) read the same movement through the realized tokens rather than the whole distribution. Figure 8 in Section 8.6 shows this contrast on a real grounded and a real hallucinated span, where the grounded span loses most of its probability once the retrieved context is removed while the hallucinated span is left almost unchanged. Figure 1 gives an overview of the procedure. We do not claim Assumption 1 holds exactly for a transformer. Real token-maps are neither globally contractive nor identical across states, so Eq. (7) is a guide to the form of the signal rather than a guarantee about a specific network, and the empirical claims rest on the measurements. What the assumption buys is a precise reason to measure a divergence between conditional gen-eration measures rather than a surface statistic, and it is testable. If decoding under a context behaves like a stable attractor, the answer-token trajectory should occupy a low-dimensional set rather than fill the state space, and the most influential con-text edit should move that trajectory more than an irrelevant one. Section 8.7 reports both, estimating the correlation dimen-sion of the trajectory and the movement it undergoes when the most influential chunk is removed against length, lexical, and position controls.   

> Page 7 of 23 Research Article Bouke, 2026
> 5.2 Grounding sensitivity

Definition 1 (Grounding sensitivity) . For an answer span yand a context unit s ⊆ c, the grounding sensitivity of y with respect to s is the distance between the conditional generation measure under the full context, μc, and under the context with sremoved, μc\s, restricted to y . We instantiate this distance with the reduction in the mean token log-likelihood of y and the JSD between the per-token predictive distributions of y, evaluated before and after removing s. 

If y is grounded in s, removing s lowers the likelihood of y and shifts its predictive distribution, so the grounding sensitivity is large. If y depends on no unit, μc\s restricted to y is close to μc

for every s and the grounding sensitivity is small. The limiting case is precise. 

Proposition 2 (Insensitivity of free-running spans) . If a span yis generated independently of the context, so that p(yt | y<t , c) = 

p(yt | y<t , c \ s) for every token t of y and every unit s , then all four grounding-sensitivity features of y defined in Section 5.3 are zero. Conversely, a nonzero value of any feature implies that y depends on at least one context unit. Proof sketch. Under the stated independence, each per-token log-likelihood difference in Eqs. (8) and (10) is zero, and each per-token JSD term in Eqs. (9) and (11) is the divergence of a distribution from itself, which is zero. The aggregates, being means and maxima of zeros, are zero. The converse is the contrapositive. 

Proposition 3 (Boundedness of the divergence features) . With the natural logarithm, every per-token JSD term satisfies 0 ≤

JSD (P ∥ Q) ≤ ln 2 , so the aggregated divergence features lie in 

[0, ln 2 ], with ln 2 ≈ 0.693 .Proof sketch. JSD is the mutual information between a fair binary mixture indicator and a sample from the mixture, which is at most one bit, equal to ln 2 nats. A mean or maximum of terms in [0, ln 2 ] stays in [0, ln 2 ].

Remark 1. In practice a hallucinated span is not perfectly independent of the context, because topic and style still leak through, so its grounding sensitivity is small but not exactly zero. The converse in Proposition 2 is also weaker than it may first appear. A nonzero feature shows only that the span reacts to removing some unit, and removing a chunk perturbs more than grounding alone, since it shortens the context, shifts the positions of the later tokens, alters formatting and any list or table structure, can truncate the context differently, and can break discourse coherence, so part of the measured sensitivity may reflect these confounds rather than genuine support. The features are therefore indicative rather than decisive, which is why we learn a threshold on the continuous signal instead of testing exact independence, and why we report empirical ranking performance rather than treating the proposition as a detector on its own. The divergence features share a common scale by Proposition 3, and the likelihood features are differ-ences that remove the dependence on absolute fluency, so the features are reasonably comparable across answers.  

> 5.3 Features

Let log p(y | c) = ∑t log p(yt | y<t , c) be the answer log-likelihood under context c, and let pct be the predictive dis-tribution at position t under context c. We re-score the fixed answer under the full context c, the empty context ∅, and the context with the k-th chunk removed c \ sk for k = 1, . . . , K.From these we form four features per span y. The reliance on context as a whole is the gap between the full-context and no-context log-likelihoods, 

> gap

(y) = 1

|y| ∑

> t∈y

h

log p(yt | y<t , c) − log p(yt | y<t , ∅)

i

, (8) with distributional counterpart the mean JSD between full-context and no-context predictions, 

> jsd ∅

(y) = 1

|y| ∑

> t∈y

JSD  pct ∥ p∅

> t

. (9) The single most supportive context unit is captured by the max-imum leave-one-out likelihood drop, 

> drop

(y) = max 

> 1≤k≤K

1

|y| ∑

> t∈y

h

log p(yt | y<t , c)

− log p(yt | y<t , c \ sk)

i

,

(10) with distributional counterpart 

> jsd loo

(y) = max 

> 1≤k≤K

1

|y| ∑

> t∈y

JSD  pct ∥ pc\sk

> t

. (11) Equations (8) and (9) measure dependence on the whole context, while Eqs. (10) and (11) localize dependence to the single most important unit, which makes the method robust when only one passage supports a span. The likelihood-based and divergence-based features are complementary by design. The likelihood drop asks how much less probable the realized answer tokens become when a unit is removed, which is the quantity most directly tied to whether the model used that unit, while the di-vergence asks how far the whole predictive distribution moves, which remains informative even when the realized answer al-ready had low probability under the full context. Reporting both lets the classifier weight the realized-token view and the whole-distribution view according to the data rather than committing to one in advance.  

> 5.4 Aggregation to spans and responses

All four conditions share the same answer tokenization, so the per-token quantities are computed once per condition and then aggregated. Spans are sentences obtained by splitting the answer at sentence-final punctuation followed by whitespace, with the character offset of each sentence retained. Each token is assigned to the sentence that contains its starting offset, and the per-token values are averaged over a sentence for span-level features and over the whole answer for response-level features. The same offsets align spans with the benchmark character-level annotations, so a sentence inherits the label and type of any annotated span it overlaps. This reuse means span-level and response-level detection share a single set of forward passes, which is the property that makes per-sentence scoring  

> Page 8 of 23 Research Article Bouke, 2026

affordable, since the finer granularity adds only arithmetic over the already-computed per-token quantities and no further model calls. The aggregation is a simple average over the tokens of a span, which keeps the span features on the same scale as the response features and avoids giving long sentences an advantage that a sum would introduce. 

5.5 Detection and explanation 

The four grounding-sensitivity features of Section 5.3 are larger for grounded spans, so the hallucination score is a decreasing function of them, and the alarm is low sensitivity, not high. The default detector, GASP-threshold, is training-free. It standard-izes the four features and thresholds their negated sum, so it needs no labeled data, and we report it as the default detec-tor throughout. An optional supervised variant, GASP-trained, replaces the fixed sum with a gradient-boosted decision tree classifier [17] that maps the feature vector of a span or a re-sponse to a hallucination score and learns the direction from labels, and a combined variant, GASP+base, adds perplexity and length to that classifier. Both are reported for compari-son with the default. We refer to the complete detector, the grounding-sensitivity features together with either the threshold or the classifier, as GASP. The explanation is a byproduct of the same computation. Be-cause the score is built from the effect of removing context units, the unit attaining the maximum in Eq. (10) is returned as the supporting evidence for a grounded span, and the absence of any unit with a large drop is the reason a span is flagged. The explanation is therefore mechanism-consistent, since the supporting unit is the very perturbation that most changed the model behavior on the span, so the reason shown to a user is computed from the same signal that produced the score rather than a post hoc rationalization from a separate method, in con-trast to detectors that emit a score and then attach an explanation that can diverge from the mechanism that produced it. For a flagged span the explanation is the absence of any unit with a large effect, which a reviewer can confirm by reading the context, and for a grounded span it is the single passage whose removal most reduced the span likelihood, which serves as a candidate supporting unit rather than a verified citation, since we do not have gold evidence alignment and evaluate the at-tribution only against automatic controls in Section 8.5. The supervised variant also exposes its feature importances, so a practitioner can see which of the four sensitivity features drove a decision in aggregate, separately from the per-span supporting passage. Figure 2 illustrates the signal. A grounded sentence draws on a specific passage, so removing that passage lowers the sen-tence’s token log-likelihood and shifts its predictive distribution, producing a large likelihood drop and divergence for the chunk that carried the support. A hallucinated sentence does not draw on any passage, so removing any chunk leaves its likelihood and predictive distribution almost unchanged, producing small values across all removals. The detector therefore assigns high grounding sensitivity to the grounded sentence and flags the hallucinated one, and it returns the supporting passage as the explanation for the grounded sentence. This behavior is the qualitative counterpart of Proposition 2, in which a grounded   

> Grounded
> sentence
> retrieved context
> remove support
> likelihood
> with without
> large drop
> high sensitivity
> Hallucinated
> sentence
> retrieved context
> remove any chunk
> likelihood
> with without
> small drop
> low sensitivity

Figure 2: Schematic of the grounding-sensitivity signal. Removing the supporting chunk sharply lowers the likelihood of a grounded sen-tence, a large drop that yields high sensitivity, but barely changes a hallucinated sentence, a small drop that yields low sensitivity. 

sentence has nonzero sensitivity to a specific unit while a free-running sentence is insensitive to all units. 

5.6 Algorithm and complexity 

Algorithm 1 summarizes the procedure, and Table 3 lists the cost of each condition. For a response with answer length 

A, vocabulary V , and K chunks, the method performs K + 2scoring passes over the fixed answer, with divergence terms costing O(AV ) per condition, and no generation or training for feature construction. Several choices warrant justification. We chunk the context rather than removing single sentences, which bounds the number of passes at K + 2 at the price of coarser localization. The scoring model need not be the generator, since the method requires only a probabilistic model of the answer under a context, so a small separate scorer can audit answers from a larger or hosted generator provided it follows the context well enough to react to its removal. The maximum over chunks is one of several reasonable ag-gregations, and the choice reflects an assumption about how support is distributed. A maximum suits single-passage support and is robust to the many irrelevant removals that leave a span unchanged, a mean would measure diffuse reliance but would be dominated by the irrelevant removals, and a top-few sum sits between the two when support is split across a small number of passages. The no-context condition is the limiting case of removing all units at once, so it is the natural partner of the single-unit maximum, and the two together bracket the range from concentrated to diffuse support. We keep the feature set deliberately small, four sensitivity features plus the baselines, both to limit the risk of overfitting on a few hundred responses and to keep the detector interpretable, since each feature has a direct reading in terms of how the span responds to removing the whole context or the single most important chunk. A further re-finement retains the sign of the likelihood change rather than its magnitude, since a passage that a span contradicts and a passage that a span relies on both change the likelihood when removed, but in directions that may differ. The AUC is threshold-free, but a deployment must choose an operating point, and because the divergence part of the signal is bounded and comparable across spans by Proposition 3, a single threshold transfers reasonably, with a low threshold favoring recall for high-stakes review and a high threshold favoring precision for automated gating. 

6 Experimental Setup  

> Page 9 of 23 Research Article Bouke, 2026

Algorithm 1: Grounding-sensitivity scoring of a RAG answer. 

Input: answer y, query q, context c split into chunks 

s1, . . . , sK , model M

Output: per-span grounding-sensitivity features and supporting unit  

> 1

ℓc, Pc ← score y with M under (q, c); 

> 2

ℓ∅, P∅ ← score y with M under (q, ∅); 

> 3

for k ← 1 to K do  

> 4

ℓ(k), P(k) ← score y with M under (q, c \ sk); 

> 5

end  

> 6

compute per-token gap, jsd ∅, leave-one-out drop,  

> jsd loo

from Eqs. (8)–(11);  

> 7

foreach sentence span y ′ in y do  

> 8

aggregate per-token features over the tokens of y′; 

> 9

k∗ ← arg max k likelihood drop on y′; 

> 10

emit features of y′ and supporting unit sk∗ ; 

> 11

end                       

> Table 3: Computational cost per response, with answer length A,vocabulary V, and Kcontext chunks.
> Condition Forward passes Divergence cost Full context 1n/a No context 1O(AV )
> Leave-one-out KO(KAV )
> Total K+2O(KAV )
> 6.1 Datasets

We evaluate on RAGTruth [13], a benchmark of retrieval-augmented answers with human span-level hallucination anno-tations and a type label for each annotated span. We use the two task types whose answers are long enough for stable estimation, summarization and data-to-text, and we sample a class-balanced set of 200 hallucinated and 200 clean responses. The same 400 responses, with identical text and gold span labels, are scored by all three models. Only the scoring model changes, so the comparison across scorers is on one fixed evaluation set. The generators that produced these answers in RAGTruth (for ex-ample GPT-4) are distinct from our scorers, which is why we describe the scorer as a probabilistic model of the answer rather than the generator. Sentence segmentation is text-based, split-ting the answer at sentence-final punctuation, so it is identical across scorers. The small difference in sentence counts, 2,586 for the Qwen tokenizer and 2,550 for SmolLM2, comes only from the 200 -token answer cap landing at a slightly different text position under each tokenizer. We use three benchmarks to answer three different questions, so their roles and their depth of treatment differ by design rather than by convenience. RAGTruth is the primary benchmark and carries the full study, because it is the only one of the three with human span-level hallucination annotations together with a hallucination-type label, which is what supports the per-type, per-task, baseline, ablation, attribution, and attractor analyses. On it we ask not only whether the signal detects hallucination but how it behaves. TofuEval then asks whether                          

> Table 4: Composition of the three evaluation benchmarks. RAGTruth covers summarization and data-to-text, TofuEval meeting summariza-tion, and RAGBench short-answer question answering. RAGTruth and RAGBench are class-balanced by sampling, while TofuEval takes the natural distribution over its summaries. Sentence counts use the Qwen tokenizer.
> Quantity RAGTruth TofuEval RAGBench Responses 400 884 797 hallucinated 200 309 400 clean 200 575 397 Sentences 2,586 2,401 3,858 hallucinated 313 440 778 grounded 2,273 1,961 3,080 Scorers 332

the signal reaches beyond RAGTruth to a different domain at the same span-level granularity, which requires a second annotated benchmark but not a repeat of every analysis. RAGBench asks whether it reaches a different task type, short-answer question answering, where the answer need not be constructed from the retrieved context. The three are therefore not interchangeable. RAGTruth establishes the method, TofuEval tests its reach across domain, and RAGBench probes its reach across task type, and each is used only to the depth its question requires. TofuEval, in its MeetingBank portion [18], [19], provides sentence-level factual-consistency labels for topic-focused sum-maries of meeting transcripts, a different domain and anno-tation scheme from RAGTruth. We map each summary into the same format, the transcript as context, the topic as query, and each summary sentence as an answer span with a binary label, raise the context cap to 1500 tokens so every transcript fits, and score all three models over 884 summaries and 2,401 sentences. RAGBench [20] is a multi-domain benchmark of retrieval-augmented question answering. We pool the test splits of six domains spanning biomedical, financial, technical, and open-domain QA into a class-balanced set of 797 responses and 3,858 sentences with genuine per-sentence unsupported-sentence labels. Because its role is to probe the reach of the method rather than to re-establish it, the two Qwen scorers are sufficient and we report a single span-level table. Table 4 summarizes the composition of the three benchmarks, and Sec-tions 7.6 and 7.7 report the TofuEval and RAGBench results.  

> 6.2 Models

We score answers with three instruction-tuned models. Two, Qwen2.5-0.5B-Instruct and Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct [21], come from one family and differ in scale, which tests robustness to model size, and the third, SmolLM2-1.7B-Instruct [22], comes from a different family, which tests robustness across lineages. All three run on a single consumer graphics processing unit (GPU) with 6 gigabytes of memory, and scoring uses forward passes only and no generation.  

> 6.3 Baselines

We compare grounding sensitivity against perplexity, the mean answer surprisal under the full context, and length, the number of answer tokens. For entailment we re- 

> Page 10 of 23 Research Article Bouke, 2026

port the cross-encoder/nli-deberta-v3-small 

and cross-encoder/nli-deberta-v3-large mod-els, 1 scoring the probability that a premise entails a sentence hypothesis, so that the comparison is not against a deliberately weak verifier. Because a long context truncated to the cross-encoder limit of 512 tokens can cut the supporting evidence, we report the entailment two ways, once with the whole con-text as premise and once as the maximum entailment over the same K = 5 chunks used by the detector, which lets the verifier attend to the single most relevant passage. We further compare against a SelfCheckGPT-style self-consistency baseline [7] that draws N = 4 stochastic regenerations of the answer from the same scorer under the same context, with temperature 1.0 and nucleus sampling at p = 0.95 , and scores each answer sentence by its average contradiction probability against the four samples under the compact NLI model, which is the sentence-level NLI variant of SelfCheckGPT. We also report a combined feature set that adds perplexity and length to the grounding-sensitivity features. The baselines above represent the detection families that can be run under one unified leakage-clean protocol, namely intrinsic uncertainty through perplexity, entailment verification through the NLI cross-encoders, and sampling agreement through self-consistency. Two closely related recent lines, the mechanistic detectors and the supervised RAG judges, are cited but not eval-uated head to head, because they operate in a different regime from the black-box, training-free setting studied here. The mechanistic detectors that separate context use from parametric knowledge, such as ReDeEP and LUMINA [11], [12], read the generator’s internal states and therefore assume white-box ac-cess to the model that produced the answer, whereas grounding sensitivity is computed from output likelihoods alone, so a faith-ful re-implementation would require their specific generators and activations rather than the scoring interface used here. The supervised detector LettuceDetect [15] trains a dedicated judg-ing model on RAGTruth, so its released weights have already seen the corpus we evaluate on, and a fair inclusion under the grouped folds would require retraining it per fold rather than reusing a model fit on data that overlaps the test partitions. It also represents the trained-judge paradigm that the training-free variant is meant to offer an alternative to. We therefore position the present work against these methods conceptually in Sec-tion 2, and we do not place their reported numbers in the same tables, because those numbers come from different generators, splits, and metrics and are not directly comparable under our protocol.  

> 6.4 Protocol and metrics

We report AUC under five-fold cross-validation with a gradient-boosted decision tree classifier. For the response level we use stratified folds, and for the span level we use stratified folds grouped by response, so that sentences from one answer never appear in both the training and the test partitions. For the per-type analysis we evaluate clean sentences against sentences of a single type at a time under the same grouped protocol.    

> 1Hugging Face: https://huggingface.co/cross-encoder/ nli-deberta-v3-small and https://huggingface.co/ cross-encoder/nli-deberta-v3-large .

Confidence intervals are 95% percentile bootstrap intervals over 1000 resamples, drawn by response at the span level so the grouping is preserved, and significance against perplexity uses a paired bootstrap on the same resamples. The point estimate in every table is the mean AUC over these resamples rather than the single value computed once on the out-of-fold predictions, a standard bootstrap summary that can differ from the latter by around a thousandth. Both the five-fold split and the number of bootstrap resamples are conventional choices for this kind of evaluation.  

> 6.5 Implementation

Context is truncated to 700 tokens and the answer to 200 tokens, the context is split into K = 5 chunks by sentence grouping for the leave-one-out perturbations, and per-token divergences are computed over the full vocabulary. Scoring an answer under a condition concatenates the formatted prompt for that condition with the answer tokens, runs one forward pass, and reads the per-token log-probabilities and predictive distributions at the answer positions. The classifier uses fixed conventional settings, 300 trees with a learning rate of 0.05 and 31 leaves, which were not tuned on the evaluation data, since the recommended detector is the training-free threshold and the classifier is reported only for comparison. All experiments use fixed random seeds. The same answer tokenization is reused across all conditions, so the per-token quantities align position by position and can be compared directly, and no fine-tuning or gradient computation is involved. Sentence boundaries and the token-to-sentence assignment use the character offsets from the tokenizer, so the span aggregation is exact rather than approximate, and fragments shorter than a few tokens are skipped because their feature estimates are unstable. Table 5 lists the full configuration used for every reported result, and Table 6 restates the four grounding-sensitivity features and the three baselines.  

> 6.6 Reproducibility

The only model calls are the K+2 scoring passes, and every-thing after is arithmetic over the stored per-token quantities, so the per-answer latency is the time of K+2 forward passes of a small model over a few hundred tokens, modest relative to generating the answer, and passes for different answers are independent, so throughput scales with parallelism. The diver-gence terms are computed over the full vocabulary, which is the most memory-intensive part. When memory is constrained, they can be computed in vocabulary blocks or restricted to the top-probability tokens with little loss, which does not affect the likelihood-based features. Because the answer is never regen-erated, the procedure is deterministic given the model and the inputs and does not depend on a sampling temperature. The sampling of responses is deterministic given the seed and every step is seeded, so a re-run reproduces the numbers exactly on the same hardware, with differences on other hardware limited to the last digits from floating-point summation order. To re-produce a reported table, one runs the scoring over the sampled responses to produce the per-token features, aggregates them to the span and response levels, and runs the grouped cross-validation with the listed classifier settings, and the figures are produced from the same feature files by the plotting scripts.  

> Page 11 of 23 Research Article Bouke, 2026

Table 5: Configuration for all experiments. The pipeline runs in two stages, GPU scoring with PyTorch, transformers, and Hugging Face datasets, then classifier training and metric computation with scikit-learn and LightGBM. 

Component Setting Scorer models Qwen2.5-0.5B / 1.5B-Instruct, SmolLM2-1.7B-Instruct Entailment models deberta-v3-small / large NLI Self-consistency samples N = 4Max context tokens 700 Max answer tokens 200 Context chunks K 5 (sensitivity: 3, 5, 10) Classifier gradient-boosted trees trees 300 learning rate 0.05 leaves 31 Cross-validation 5-fold span level grouped by response Bootstrap resamples 1000, grouped Random seed fixed GPU NVIDIA RTX 3060 Laptop, 6 GB CPU Intel Core i7-11800H System RAM 32 GB Operating system Windows 11 Python 3.14 PyTorch 2.6.0 (CUDA 12.4) transformers 5.3.0 Hugging Face datasets 4.7.0 scikit-learn 1.8.0 LightGBM 4.6.0 

Table 6: Summary of features and baselines. 

Name Definition  

> gap

full vs no-context log-likelihood, Eq. (8)  

> jsd ∅

full vs no-context JSD, Eq. (9)  

> drop

max leave-one-out drop, Eq. (10)  

> jsd loo

max leave-one-out JSD, Eq. (11) perplexity Eq. (1) under full context length number of answer tokens NLI entailment entailment probability, context vs answer 

7 Results 

7.1 Response-level detection 

Table 7 reports response-level AUC with 95% bootstrap con-fidence intervals for three scorers spanning two model fam-ilies. The training-free default, GASP-threshold, reaches 0.745 , 0.713 , and 0.741 for Qwen2.5-0.5B, Qwen2.5-1.5B, and SmolLM2-1.7B, and the trained classifier reaches 0.706 , 0.726 ,

Figure 3: Span-level AUC by feature set for the three scorers, with bootstrap 95% confidence intervals as error bars. GASP-thr is the training-free threshold-only default, GASP-trn the trained classifier, and GASP+base the trained combined set. All sit well above perplexity, length, and the chance line (dashed). 

Figure 4: Response-level AUC by feature set for the three scorers, with bootstrap 95% confidence intervals as error bars. GASP-thr is the training-free threshold-only default, GASP-trn the trained classifier, GASP+base the trained combined set. Dashed line: chance. 

and 0.716 . Both are well above perplexity, which attains 0.581 ,0.624 , and 0.578 , and far above the length baseline near 0.55 .The trained classifier’s gap over perplexity is +0.10 to +0.14 and is significant under a paired bootstrap on all three scorers, with p < 0.001 , p = 0.002 , and p = 0.001 . Adding the base-lines to the trained classifier changes the score only marginally, so grounding sensitivity already carries the signal at the re-sponse level. Figure 4 visualizes the comparison. 

7.2 Span-level detection 

Table 8 reports span-level AUC under the leakage-clean, response-grouped protocol, again with bootstrap confidence in-tervals. The default GASP-threshold reaches 0.672 , 0.673 , and 0.681 across the three scorers and the trained classifier reaches 0.635 , 0.645 , and 0.657 , above perplexity ( 0.536 , 0.565 , 0.615 )and the length baseline near 0.55 . The grounding gap over per-plexity is significant on all three scorers under a paired bootstrap (p < 0.001 , p < 0.001 , and p = 0.022 ). The combined trained set improves the span-level score to between 0.676 and 0.702 ,and a well-configured chunk-level NLI verifier reaches 0.677 (Section 8.2), so grounding sensitivity and a strong entailment verifier are close at this granularity. Figure 3 shows the same comparison, and Figure 5 shows the span-level ROC curves for the three scorers, where the grounding curve stays above perplexity and whole-context NLI entailment across most of the operating range.  

> Page 12 of 23 Research Article Bouke, 2026

Table 7: Response-level hallucination detection AUC with 95% bootstrap confidence intervals over 1000 resamples, three scorers. GASP-threshold (default) is the training-free variant. Best mean per column in bold. 

Feature set Qwen2.5-0.5B Qwen2.5-1.5B SmolLM2-1.7B Perplexity 0.581 [0.524, 0.638] 0.624 [0.572, 0.675] 0.578 [0.522, 0.630] Length 0.553 [0.496, 0.611] 0.553 [0.497, 0.609] 0.539 [0.483, 0.593] GASP-threshold (default) 0.745 [0.692, 0.793] 0.713 [0.661, 0.765] 0.741 [0.691, 0.788] GASP-trained 0.706 [0.654, 0.757] 0.726 [0.676, 0.776] 0.716 [0.667, 0.766] GASP+base (trained) 0.731 [0.679, 0.779] 0.713 [0.658, 0.760] 0.717 [0.668, 0.765] 

Table 8: Span-level (sentence) AUC under the leakage-clean protocol with folds grouped by response, with 95% bootstrap confidence intervals. GASP-threshold (default) is the training-free variant. The lower block separates the two hallucination types (single type versus clean). Best mean per column in bold. 

Feature set Qwen2.5-0.5B Qwen2.5-1.5B SmolLM2-1.7B Perplexity 0.536 [0.506, 0.568] 0.565 [0.532, 0.599] 0.615 [0.584, 0.646] Length 0.547 [0.510, 0.583] 0.548 [0.512, 0.582] 0.523 [0.489, 0.558] GASP-threshold (default) 0.672 [0.641, 0.701] 0.673 [0.645, 0.700] 0.681 [0.655, 0.708] GASP-trained 0.635 [0.608, 0.664] 0.645 [0.615, 0.675] 0.657 [0.624, 0.687] GASP+base (trained) 0.676 [0.647, 0.703] 0.678 [0.648, 0.707] 0.702 [0.673, 0.731] baseless vs clean 0.620 0.638 0.641 conflict vs clean 0.685 0.704 0.681 

7.3 Robustness across scorers 

The grounding-sensitivity AUC is stable across the three tested scorers at both granularities, and the three fall within each other’s confidence intervals, which suggests the signal reflects the grounding relationship rather than a particular model. The three span two families, since SmolLM2-1.7B is from a dif-ferent lineage than the two Qwen models, so the result is not purely within-family, though three scorers remain a small sam-ple and families such as Llama, Mistral, and Gemma, and larger scorers, would be needed to claim broad invariance. The mar-gin over perplexity is not equally large on every scorer. On SmolLM2 the perplexity baseline is stronger at the span level, 0.615 , and the grounding gap is correspondingly smaller, 0.657 against 0.615 and still significant at p = 0.022 , whereas on the Qwen scorers perplexity is weaker and the gap is wider, so the advantage is consistent in sign but not identical in size across scorers. Among the other baselines, the length baseline is far below grounding sensitivity for every scorer, so the detector is not tracking span length, and the whole-context entailment base-line stays below grounding sensitivity, though a chunk-level entailment verifier is competitive (Section 8.2). This robustness has a specific scope. It indicates that across the scorers tested, which vary in size and family, the grounding signal is essen-tially unchanged, but not that an arbitrarily weak scorer would suffice, because a scorer that fails to attend to the context would react little to its removal even for grounded spans, which would compress the signal toward chance. The three scorers are all competent at following the context, so the property the method needs is competence at using the context rather than raw scale, and that property is already present in small instruction-tuned models. 

7.4 Per-type analysis 

The lower block of Table 8 separates the two hallucination types. Grounding sensitivity detects evident-conflict sentences slightly better than baseless-information sentences on all three scor-ers, with conflict at 0.685 , 0.704 , and 0.681 against baseless at 0.620 , 0.638 , and 0.641 . Both types are detected well above chance, the ordering is consistent across scorers, and the gap is modest, so grounding sensitivity detects both unsupported additions and contradictions. Detecting both matters, since a detector that only caught baseless additions would miss the contradictions that are often the more dangerous errors in a high-stakes setting, and a detector that only caught contradictions would miss the unsupported additions that are more common. The consistency of the ordering across the three scorers also makes it less likely that the per-type difference is a sampling ar-tifact, and it motivates the direction-aware refinement discussed later. 

7.5 Detection by task type 

RAGTruth mixes two task types, and a single-benchmark result is stronger if the signal is not tuned to one of them. Table 9 splits the trained grounding detector by task under the same leakage-clean protocol. The signal is present on both, with data-to-text detected more consistently, response AUC 0.62 to 0.67 and span AUC 0.58 to 0.66 , than summarization, whose values are more variable and, for the 1.5 B scorer at the span level, fall to 0.535 with a confidence interval that includes chance. Summarization also contributes far fewer hallucinated spans to the sample, which widens its intervals. The split shows that                         

> Page 13 of 23 Research Article Bouke, 2026
> Table 9: Grounding detection AUC by RAGTruth task type, leakage-clean protocol, using the trained detector (GASP-trained) as a consis-tent reference across tasks. These are point estimates with wide confi-dence intervals, since each task contributes roughly 200 responses.
> Level Task Qwen-0.5B Qwen-1.5B SmolLM2 Response Summary 0.554 0.669 0.636 Response Data2txt 0.661 0.619 0.669 Span Summary 0.563 0.535 0.646 Span Data2txt 0.577 0.629 0.660

the method generalizes across task type but is not uniformly strong, and that data-to-text, where an answer restates structured fields, exposes the dependence on evidence more cleanly than free-form summarization.  

> 7.6 TofuEval

Table 10 reports the TofuEval result over 884 summaries and 2,401 sentences, scored with the identical pipeline and features under the leakage-clean protocol. The benchmark and its map-ping to our format are described in Section 6.1. At the span level GASP-threshold reaches 0.693 on all three scorers, computed independently per scorer and coinciding only after rounding to three decimals, close to and slightly above its RAGTruth values, and the trained and combined variants sit between 0.63 and 0.68 , all significantly above perplexity, which stays at 0.52 to 0.56 , with the grounding gap over perplexity significant on every scorer ( p < 0.001 , except p = 0.005 at the response level for the 1.5 B scorer). Length is near chance. The training-free threshold-only default again matches or exceeds the trained clas-sifier. Response-level detection is a little lower, 0.61 to 0.66 ,and remains significantly above perplexity. Taken together, two benchmarks in two domains, with consistent behavior and the same recommended default detector, is stronger evidence of external validity than either alone, though two datasets remain a limited sample.  

> 7.7 RAGBench

RAGBench probes the complementary question of where the signal does not hold, on multi-domain short-answer QA. The benchmark and its pooling across six domains are described in Section 6.1. At the span level (Table 11), unlike the sum-marization benchmarks, grounding sensitivity is comparable to perplexity rather than better, with the trained detector at 0.60 and the threshold-only variant at 0.57 against perplexity at 0.61 to 0.62 , and the grounding gap over perplexity is not significant (p > 0.5). The combined set reaches 0.67 to 0.68 , above either alone, so the grounding features still add complementary infor-mation, but on this benchmark perplexity carries most of the signal. On the labeling side, RAGBench annotates each exam-ple with a set of unsupported response-sentence keys, so the span-level labels are genuine sentence-level labels obtained the same way as for RAGTruth and TofuEval, and the span-level AUC is a like-for-like comparison across the three benchmarks. We report the span level rather than the response level because the response-level adherence label is coarse, marking a whole multi-sentence response unsupported if any single sentence is, which is poorly matched to features averaged over an otherwise grounded response. This is a scope boundary rather than a failure of the method. The direction of the signal is unchanged, since grounded sentences remain more sensitive to context removal than hallucinated ones, but its magnitude is small on short-answer, knowledge-intensive QA. A plausible reason is that when a model can answer a fac-tual question from its parametric knowledge, a grounded answer is not strongly sensitive to removing the retrieved passage, be-cause the model would produce it anyway, and perplexity is already discriminative in that regime. Grounding sensitivity is therefore best suited to settings where the answer must be constructed from the provided context, such as summarization and data-to-text, where RAGTruth and TofuEval show the clear gains, and it adds little over perplexity on short-answer retrieval QA. 

8 Analysis and Diagnostics 

Having established the detection results, this section examines the detector in more detail.  

> 8.1 Feature analysis

Figure 6 shows that the grounding sensitivity of grounded sen-tences is shifted toward larger context-removal effects than that of hallucinated sentences, with overlap in the middle that is consistent with the moderate absolute AUC. Figure 7 shows that no single feature dominates the combined classifier on any scorer, since the four grounding features carry comparable gain and length is the weakest throughout. The relative roles of the two views are clearer in the ablation of Section 8.3, where the no-context features are the strongest single group and the leave-one-out features add a smaller complementary signal at the span level. This is consistent with the design intuition that a grounded sentence usually leans on one passage, which the leave-one-out contrast localizes, while total reliance on the con-text is captured by the no-context contrast. The combined model being strongest at the span level, where the single-passage view and the whole-context view are both available, indicates that the two signals capture different aspects of dependence rather than redundant ones, and it explains why neither alone reaches the combined performance.  

> 8.2 Comparison with baselines

Table 12 compares grounding sensitivity at the span level, on the Qwen2.5-1.5B scorer, against the entailment and self-consistency baselines. The large NLI cross-encoder improves on the small one, from 0.532 to 0.605 with the whole con-text, and to 0.677 when it is allowed to attend to the single best of the K = 5 chunks rather than a premise truncated at 512 tokens. Configured this way, the entailment verifier es-sentially matches GASP at the span level, 0.677 against the threshold-only 0.673 and the trained 0.645 , so GASP does not exceed a well-configured chunk-level NLI verifier at this granu-larity, and the two lie within each other’s confidence intervals. GASP instead requires no separate verifier model, uses the same scorer that computes the likelihood, extends to the re-sponse level, where the entailment baselines are undefined, and produces the attribution evaluated in Section 8.5. By contrast, the self-consistency baseline reaches 0.486 , near chance in this  

> Page 14 of 23 Research Article Bouke, 2026

Table 10: TofuEval-MeetingBank, sentence-level factual consistency for topic-focused meeting summaries, under the leakage-clean protocol with 95% bootstrap confidence intervals. GASP-threshold is the training-free default. Best mean per column in bold. 

Feature set Qwen-0.5B Qwen-1.5B SmolLM2 

Response level 

Perplexity 0.521 [0.481, 0.562] 0.548 [0.509, 0.586] 0.516 [0.479, 0.552] GASP-threshold (default) 0.625 [0.584, 0.663] 0.623 [0.581, 0.663] 0.614 [0.575, 0.653] GASP-trained 0.632 [0.594, 0.669] 0.627 [0.590, 0.665] 0.641 [0.605, 0.680] GASP+base (trained) 0.659 [0.620, 0.697] 0.633 [0.594, 0.670] 0.656 [0.614, 0.695] 

Span level 

Perplexity 0.555 [0.525, 0.587] 0.516 [0.487, 0.545] 0.524 [0.497, 0.553] Length 0.515 [0.485, 0.544] 0.515 [0.484, 0.545] 0.535 [0.503, 0.565] GASP-threshold (default) 0.693 [0.659, 0.726] 0.693 [0.661, 0.726] 0.693 [0.658, 0.726] GASP-trained 0.656 [0.620, 0.691] 0.642 [0.607, 0.676] 0.631 [0.593, 0.664] GASP+base (trained) 0.672 [0.636, 0.705] 0.675 [0.642, 0.709] 0.680 [0.646, 0.714] 

Table 11: Scope probe on RAGBench, a multi-domain short-answer QA benchmark ( 797 responses, 3,858 sentences, two Qwen scorers). Span-level AUC with 95% bootstrap confidence intervals. Unlike the summarization benchmarks, grounding sensitivity is comparable to, not better than, perplexity here (grounding versus perplexity p > 0.5). 

Method Qwen-0.5B Qwen-1.5B Perplexity 0.613 [0.590, 0.634] 0.619 [0.599, 0.642] GASP-threshold 0.576 [0.540, 0.610] 0.573 [0.540, 0.607] GASP-trained 0.595 [0.572, 0.618] 0.596 [0.573, 0.618] GASP+base (trained) 0.668 [0.646, 0.690] 0.679 [0.659, 0.700] 

Figure 5: Span-level ROC for the three scorers, comparing grounding sensitivity with perplexity and whole-context NLI entailment. The whole-context NLI baseline does not depend on the scorer, so it is drawn as a shared reference in each panel. A chunk-level entailment verifier, reported in Table 12, is competitive with grounding sensitivity and is not shown here. 

grounded-summarization setting, at a cost of N full generations per answer rather than K+2 scoring passes over a fixed answer. The two GASP variants are also compared. The training-free threshold-only variant, a negated standardized sum of the four features with no learned parameters, reaches 0.673 , slightly above the trained gradient-boosted classifier at 0.645 , and this ordering is not a protocol artifact. Evaluating the threshold-only variant under the same grouped five-fold cross-validation, with the per-feature mean and standard deviation fit on the training folds only, gives the same 0.673 [0.645 , 0.700 ] as fitting them on the whole set, so there is no standardization leakage and both estimates are out-of-fold. On a dataset of a few hundred responses the tree ensemble overfits slightly relative to the zero-parameter monotone sum, so the simpler detector generalizes at least as well while requiring no labeled data. We therefore use the threshold-only variant as the default GASP detector and report the trained classifier for comparison. Adding perplexity and length to the trained classifier reaches 0.678 , within the confidence interval of the threshold-only variant.  

> Page 15 of 23 Research Article Bouke, 2026

Figure 6: Distribution of grounding sensitivity, measured as the maximum log-likelihood drop on context removal, for grounded versus hallucinated sentences, shown for each of the three scorers. 

Figure 7: Classifier feature importance (gain) at the span level, for the three scorers, with the four grounding features in navy and the perplexity and length baselines in amber. No single feature dominates. The grounding features carry comparable gain, with length the weakest on each scorer. 

Table 12: Span-level comparison against the entailment and self-consistency baselines, Qwen2.5-1.5B scorer, with 95% bootstrap confi-dence intervals. Bold marks the recommended default detector, not the maximum, since the chunk-level NLI verifier and the combined trained set fall within its confidence interval. 

Method Span AUC Perplexity 0.565 [0.532, 0.599] Length 0.548 [0.512, 0.582] NLI, small, whole context 0.532 NLI, large, whole context 0.605 [0.574, 0.637] NLI, large, max-chunk 0.677 [0.649, 0.704] SelfCheckGPT-NLI ( N=4) 0.486 [0.446, 0.525] GASP-threshold (default) 0.673 [0.645, 0.700] GASP-trained 0.645 [0.615, 0.675] GASP+base (trained) 0.678 [0.648, 0.707] 

8.3 Ablation and sensitivity 

Table 13 ablates the four features on the Qwen2.5-1.5B scorer at the span level. No single feature matches the full set, and the two views contribute in different proportions. The no-context and divergence pairs are the strongest groups, and the leave-one-out divergence is the weakest single feature, yet removing it lowers the full-set score, so all four carry non-redundant infor-mation. At the response level the balance shifts further toward the whole-context view, where the no-context divergence alone reaches 0.727 on the 1.5 B scorer, close to the full-set 0.726 ,while the localized leave-one-out view matters more at the span level, where a single passage supports a sentence. The no-context contrast, a single extra scoring pass, therefore carries most of the discriminative power, especially at the response level, and the K leave-one-out passes add a smaller amount of complementary signal at the span level. The K+2 passes are nonetheless justified because the leave-one-out passes produce the attribution, the candidate supporting chunk for each sen-tence, which the no-context contrast cannot provide, so they buy the explanation rather than most of the detection. A deploy-ment that needs only a detection score, and not the per-sentence supporting passage, can run the two-pass full-versus-no-context variant at most of the accuracy and a fraction of the cost. Table 14 varies the two design choices a practitioner must set, the chunk count K and the leave-one-out aggregation. The span-level AUC changes by at most 0 .03 across K ∈ { 3, 5, 10 }

and across the maximum, mean, and top-two aggregations, and every value overlaps the others within the confidence intervals, so the method is not sensitive to these choices. We fixed K = 5                                    

> Page 16 of 23 Research Article Bouke, 2026
> Table 13: Feature ablation at the span level, Qwen2.5-1.5B scorer, with 95% bootstrap confidence intervals. Single features (top) and feature groups (bottom). All four features contribute, and the no-context and divergence views carry most of the signal.
> Feature subset Span AUC gap (no-context likelihood) 0.620 [0.588, 0.651] jsd ∅(no-context divergence) 0.616 [0.583, 0.645] drop (leave-one-out likelihood) 0.600 [0.568, 0.632] jsd loo (leave-one-out divergence) 0.595 [0.563, 0.625] no-context only (gap, jsd ∅)0.638 [0.610, 0.666] leave-one-out only (drop, jsd loo )0.616 [0.582, 0.648] likelihood only (gap, drop) 0.636 [0.607, 0.664] divergence only (jsd ∅, jsd loo )0.640 [0.609, 0.668] all four (GASP) 0.645 [0.615, 0.675]
> Table 14: Sensitivity to the chunk count Kand to the leave-one-out aggregation, span level, Qwen2.5-1.5B, with 95% bootstrap confidence intervals. The signal is stable across both choices.
> Setting Span AUC
> K=3 chunks 0.670 [0.639, 0.699]
> K=5 chunks (default) 0.645 [0.615, 0.675]
> K=10 chunks 0.640 [0.611, 0.670] aggregation: max (default) 0.645 [0.615, 0.675] aggregation: mean 0.625 [0.595, 0.655] aggregation: top-2 sum 0.638 [0.606, 0.669]

before running any experiment, as a balance of localization and cost, and report K ∈ { 3, 10 } only as a post-hoc sensitivity check, so no value of K was selected on the test data. Coarser chunking with K = 3 is marginally best, consistent with a sentence leaning on a small span of context, but the difference is within noise.  

> 8.4 Effect of truncation

Because a 6 gigabyte GPU bounds the context to 700 tokens and the answer to 200 , we quantify what truncation removes. About 42% of contexts on the Qwen scorers and 48% on SmolLM2 exceed 700 tokens and are cut, and about 25 to 28% of answers exceed 200 tokens. The labels are largely preserved, since 90 to 92% of annotated hallucination spans start within the kept an-swer, so most annotated spans remain scorable. Context trunca-tion, however, can remove the passage that supports a grounded sentence, which would lower that sentence’s measured sen-sitivity and push it toward the hallucinated side. Truncation therefore likely introduces noise and depresses sensitivity esti-mates, which would make the reported numbers conservative, but they are not a strict lower bound, since cutting the context can also alter the effective grounding contract the scorer sees, and a sentence that is supported in the full context may become genuinely unsupported relative to the shortened input. A larger context window is the most direct way to remove this confound.  

> 8.5 Explanation quality

GASP returns, for each sentence, the chunk whose removal most reduces its likelihood as a candidate supporting passage. RAGTruth annotates hallucinated spans but not the gold support-ing passage for grounded ones, so we cannot compute a gold hit rate and instead run a proxy on the 2,273 grounded sentences of the Qwen2.5-1.5B scorer, using the large NLI cross-encoder as an independent notion of support. The attributed chunk entails its sentence with mean probability 0.50 , far above a random chunk at 0.05 and the highest lexical-overlap chunk at 0.07 ,with paired Wilcoxon p < 10 −240 in both comparisons, so the attribution tracks entailment rather than surface overlap. It is also close to the best available, since the single most entailing of the five chunks reaches 0.56 on average. In 69% of grounded sentences the drop-attributed chunk is exactly the chunk the NLI model ranks as most entailing, against a 20% chance rate for five chunks. The best-chunk entailment is also higher for grounded sentences than for hallucinated ones, 0.56 against 0.28 with p < 10 −23 , consistent with grounded sentences hav-ing a genuine supporting passage and hallucinated ones not. The Wilcoxon tests above are over the 2,273 grounded sen-tences, which are not independent, since several come from one response, so we also aggregate to the 399 responses that contain a grounded sentence and repeat the test on per-response means. The pattern holds, with attributed 0.50 against random 0.05 and lexical 0.07 , a per-response agreement of 69% , and paired Wilcoxon p < 10 −62 against both controls, so the effect is not an artifact of within-response dependence. These are proxy results, since the reference is an NLI model rather than a human evidence alignment, so we frame the returned chunk as a candidate supporting passage rather than a verified citation. A small human study that labels each attribution as correct, partial, topical, or incorrect support would strengthen the claim further and is left to future work.  

> 8.6 Qualitative case study

Table 15 traces the method on two spans from the same Data2txt overview task, both scored by Qwen2.5-1.5B, to show the sig-nal behind the aggregate numbers. The first span is grounded and the second is unsupported by the retrieved context. In the grounded case the model reports that popular dishes include sizzling rice soup and imperial shrimp, a detail carried by a sin-gle customer review that names those exact dishes. Removing that one chunk lowers the span log-likelihood by 3.55 nats and moves its predictive distribution by a Jensen-Shannon diver-gence of 0.37 , the standardized grounding-sensitivity score is 

+13 .1 , and the same leave-one-out step that produces the score returns that review as the supporting chunk. In the unsupported case the model asserts vegetarian, gluten-free, and vegan op-tions that appear nowhere in the business record or its reviews. The span counts as a hallucination because it is unsupported by the retrieved evidence rather than false in the world, following the grounding notion set out in Section 3.1. Here removing any chunk changes the log-likelihood by at most 0.03 nats, the largest divergence is 0.01 , and the score is −5.9 , so the span is flagged. The two spans show the behavior the detector depends on, since a grounded span leans on specific evidence and reacts when that evidence is removed, whereas an unsupported span is produced from the model prior and stays almost fixed as the  

> Page 17 of 23 Research Article Bouke, 2026

Table 15: Qualitative case study of two spans from the same Data2txt task in RAGTruth, scored by Qwen2.5-1.5B. The grounded span reacts sharply when its supporting chunk is removed, while the unsupported span is almost invariant to the context. All values are the actual per-span GASP features, with gaps and drops in nats.                    

> Supported span Unsupported span
> Query “Write an objective overview about the following local business based only on the provided structured data. . . Don’t make up information.” The same instruction, applied to a different business. Generated span “Some popular dishes include sizzling rice soup and imperial shrimp.” “The menu offers a variety of options. . . such as vegetarian, gluten-free, and vegan choices.” Gold label Grounded Hallucinated (baseless) Most influential chunk Customer review: “. . . I personally really love the sizzling rice soup and imperial shrimp.” Customer review: “. . . a really good bison burger. . . cheese pizza. . . French fries were way too salty”, with no mention of dietary options. Gap, all context re-moved
> +3.52 +0.09 Max chunk drop, leave-one-out
> +3.55 +0.03 Max chunk JSD 0.37 0.01 Grounding-sensitivity score
> +13 .1−5.9GASP outcome Supported. The review chunk is returned as the evi-dence, and the span restates it, so removing that chunk collapses the likelihood. Flagged as a likely hallucination. The span states details not supported by the retrieved evidence, so removing any chunk barely changes the likelihood.

context changes. The same two spans make the reason for the dynamical-systems framing concrete. Figure 8 plots the per-token log-probability of each span with the retrieved context and without it. For the grounded span, the content words such as “soup”, “imperial”, and “shrimp” are near-certain with the context and fall to log-probabilities between about −4 and −8 once it is removed, so the span is a high-probability continuation only under the context. In the language of Section 5.1, the answer sits on the attractor induced by the retrieved evidence, and removing that evidence moves the attractor out from under it. For the hallucinated span, the two curves lie almost on top of each other, so the unsupported options are equally probable with or without the context, which places the span on the model’s context-free prior rather than on the context attractor. Grounding sensitivity is the size of this gap aggregated over the span, which is why we read grounding as movement of a context-conditioned measure rather than as a surface property of the text. 

8.7 Attractor estimation and controls 

Section 5.1 framed decoding under a context as a stable attractor and derived, in Proposition 1, that a context edit moves that at-tractor by an amount the detector reads. We test the observable consequences on a balanced sample of 200 responses scored by Qwen2.5-1.5B, extracting the answer-token trajectory and esti-mating its correlation dimension by the Grassberger-Procaccia method with a Euclidean metric and a scaling region between the 5th and 60th percentiles of pairwise distances. First, the trajectory is low-dimensional and this is stable across depth, with correlation dimension 8.3 , 9.8 , and 8.0 at an early, middle, and late layer in a hidden space of dimension 1536 . That the estimator is meaningful rather than always small is confirmed by an iid-Gaussian cloud of the same size, whose estimated dimension is 74 . The no-context trajectory has a similar dimen-sion of 9.3 , so low-dimensionality reflects the general geometry of decoding and is not specific to the context attractor. Second, and more discriminating, removing the most influential chunk by likelihood moves the trajectory more than every control, with a mean movement of 8.4 against 3.3 for a random chunk, 3.7for a length-matched chunk, 4.2 for the highest lexical-overlap chunk, and 4.1 for the first chunk, so the movement is not an artifact of chunk length, lexical overlap, or position. The paired Wilcoxon tests over the 200 responses give p < 10 −25 against each control. Figure 9 illustrates this on one representative response, where removing the most influential chunk pulls the answer-token trajectory away from its full-context path while a length-matched removal leaves it almost unchanged. The move-ment also correlates with the likelihood feature the detector uses, Spearman 0.71 (p < 10 −30 ) at the response level. The hidden-state movement does not, however, by itself separate grounded from hallucinated sentences at this sample size, 8.55 against 8.19 with p = 0.15 , so the discrimination the detector achieves comes from the likelihood and divergence readouts rather than from the raw magnitude of the trajectory movement. Taken together, the measurements support the interpretation that a specific context edit moves a low-dimensional decod-ing trajectory, and they do so under controls that rule out the simplest confounds, but they do not prove the contraction as-sumption and they do not show that trajectory geometry alone is a detector. 

8.8 Summary of findings 

The results support five main findings. Grounding sensitivity ranks hallucinated content above grounded content at both gran-ularities and on all three scorers, at a moderate absolute level that is clearly above perplexity, length, whole-context entail- 

> Page 18 of 23 Research Article Bouke, 2026

Figure 8: Per-token log-probability of the two case-study spans, with and without the retrieved context, under Qwen2.5-1.5B. (a) The grounded span collapses when the context is removed. (b) The hallucinated span is almost unchanged. The mean gap between the curves, +3.52 against 

+0.09 nats, is the grounding-sensitivity signal. 

Figure 9: Answer-token hidden-state trajectory at the middle layer for a representative grounded response, under the full context, removal of the most influential chunk, and removal of a length-matched control (Qwen2.5-1.5B). (a) Two-dimensional PCA projection. Removing the influential chunk pulls the trajectory away from the full-context path, while the control removal stays close. (b) Per-token shift from the full-context trajectory, larger for the influential-chunk removal, with mean movement 9.1 against 3.7.

ment, and a self-consistency baseline, and competitive with a well-configured chunk-level entailment verifier at the span level while needing no separate verifier and while also provid-ing a response-level score and an attribution. A training-free threshold on the standardized features matches the trained clas-sifier, so no labeled data is required. The signal is consistent across the three tested scorers, whose AUC agrees within the confidence intervals, and the grounding and baseline signals are complementary at the span level while grounding sensitivity alone carries the response-level signal. The signal transfers to a second summarization benchmark, TofuEval, but a probe on RAGBench shows it is not universal, since it is strongest for context-constructed outputs such as summarization and data-to-text and weak on short-answer QA, where parametric knowl-edge can substitute for retrieved evidence. The hidden-state measurements are consistent with a low-dimensional decoding trajectory that moves more under the most influential edit than under length, lexical, and position controls, though they do not show that trajectory geometry alone separates grounded from hallucinated sentences. Together these support the central claim that grounding is best tested relationally, by perturbing the evidence, rather than read from intrinsic properties of the text. 

9 Discussion   

> Page 19 of 23 Research Article Bouke, 2026
> 9.1 Claim hierarchy

This section separates what the paper proves, what it measures, and what it conjectures. The proven part is narrow and condi-tional. Under the average-contraction assumption, Proposition 1 bounds the movement of the conditional generation attractor by the JSD the detector computes, and Propositions 2 and 3 fix the limiting behavior and the scale of the features. These are statements about an idealized RNIFS, not about a specific trans-former, and we do not claim the assumption holds exactly for the models we use. The measured part is the substance of the paper. On a span-annotated benchmark, under a leakage-clean protocol with bootstrap confidence intervals and paired sig-nificance tests, grounding sensitivity ranks hallucinated spans above grounded ones better than perplexity, length, and whole-context entailment, and it does so consistently across three scor-ers that span two model families. The absolute level is moderate rather than decisive. The conjectured part is that the measured signal reflects the attractor movement the theory describes. The correlation-dimension and trajectory-movement estimates in Section 8.7 support this reading but do not establish it, and a signed, direction-aware variant is a hypothesis we leave to future work. A reader should take the empirical ranking claims as the load-bearing ones, the theory as the reason the features take the form they do, and the dynamical-systems language as an interpretation that the measurements make plausible rather than prove. The scope of the empirical claim is specific. GASP should be understood as a detector of dependence on retrieved evidence, not a universal detector of factual correctness, which is why it helps most where the answer is constructed from the context and adds little on short-answer questions the model can answer from parametric knowledge.  

> 9.2 Interpretation of the mechanism

Grounding sensitivity measures a relational, counterfactual property, how much a span depends on its evidence, not an intrinsic property of the text. This is why it separates hallu-cinated from grounded spans where fluency-based signals do not. It asks how the answer would have changed had a passage been absent, in the same spirit as influence analysis, and the answer to that question is what grounding means. A surface-overlap comparison would instead conflate topical similarity with grounding, because an unsupported sentence on the same topic shares many tokens with the context while depending on none of them. This is also why the signal is largely in-sensitive to how fluently the answer is written, since a fluent and a clumsy paraphrase of the same passage both collapse in probability when the passage is removed, and a fluent and a clumsy unsupported sentence both fail to react, so the fluency axis along which intrinsic detectors vary is orthogonal to the dependence axis the method measures.  

> 9.3 Per-type behavior

We expected the baseless type to be the easier case, but evident-conflict spans are detected slightly and consistently better. A plausible reason is that a conflicting span interacts strongly with the passage it contradicts, so its likelihood is sensitive to that passage’s removal, while some baseless additions are topically plausible and only weakly sensitive to any single unit. This suggests a signed variant that records whether removal raises or lowers the likelihood, since reliance lowers it and contradiction may raise it once the conflicting evidence is gone. The current magnitude feature collapses these cases, which we leave as future work.  

> 9.4 Relation to faithfulness evaluation

The summarization literature has long measured faithfulness, the requirement that a summary assert only what its source supports, and it established that faithfulness is distinct from fluency and is best judged at a fine granularity. Grounding sensitivity operationalizes the same requirement for retrieval-augmented answers, but it differs from the standard faithfulness metrics in three ways that matter for deployment. It is computed from a probabilistic scorer rather than by an external judge, so there is no separate verifier to maintain or to match to the domain. It is defined at the span level by construction, so it does not require a separate decomposition of the answer into atomic units before scoring. And it produces, for each span, the passage that supports it, which a faithfulness score alone does not. Where decomposition-based evaluation multiplies verifier calls across atomic facts, the present method amortizes a fixed number of scoring passes across the whole answer and reads every sentence from the same passes, which is what makes it cheap enough to run on every answer rather than as an offline evaluation.  

> 9.5 Deployment and use

The detector fits an explainable guardrail that slots into a RAG pipeline after generation, since the pipeline already holds the query, the chunks, and the answer. Given the moderate absolute performance, its right role is a triage and review-prioritization signal, an assistive guardrail rather than a standalone safety filter that gates content without human oversight. In that role a deployment can highlight low-sensitivity sentences for review, attach the supporting passage to each grounded sentence as an inline citation, or, only in a lower-stakes setting, hold back sentences whose grounding sensitivity falls below a chosen threshold. The AUC is threshold-free, but a deployment must choose an operating point from the cost of review and from a representative class prior, since a live stream is dominated by grounded content, which is why we report the full ROC rather than a single threshold-dependent score. More broadly, the method is detection, and it is complementary to improving retrieval, because even with strong retrieval a generator can ignore or contradict a supplied passage. The two address differ-ent failure points, since better retrieval reduces the chance that the model lacks the evidence it needs, while detection catches the cases where the model fails to use the evidence it has. The method also yields a retrieval-side benefit indirectly, because the supporting passage it returns for each grounded sentence is exactly the attribution a citation interface would display, which can be reused to surface evidence to the user. Because the scorer is independent of the system under audit, the guardrail can be deployed without access to the internals of the generator that produced the answers, which matters when that generator is hosted or proprietary.  

> 9.6 Absolute performance

The absolute scores are moderate, and detection from the an-swer and its context alone is hard, because some grounded  

> Page 20 of 23 Research Article Bouke, 2026

sentences restate widely known facts that a model would assign high probability without any passage, and some hallucinations inherit enough topical context to behave like grounded text. This level is reached with a small scorer, a compact feature family, and no task-specific training. The comparison that mat-ters is relative, and grounding sensitivity sits well above the intrinsic and whole-context baselines under the same protocol, is competitive with a well-configured chunk-level entailment verifier, and additionally localizes and explains its decisions. The path to higher absolute numbers, through stronger scorers, richer aggregation, and complementary signals, is open and does not alter the central finding that grounding must be tested by perturbing the evidence.  

> 9.7 Cost and relation to influence

The dominant cost is the K + 2 scoring passes per response in Table 3. Because the answer is fixed, these are scoring passes rather than generation, far cheaper than decoding the answer, and they parallelize across conditions and responses. The linear factor can be reduced by coarser chunking or by restricting the leave-one-out set to the highest-ranked retrieved units. Concep-tually the measure is close to leave-one-out influence estimation. As an alternative, reading attention as a proxy for dependence is cheaper, but attention indicates where the model looks rather than whether the output would change if a unit were gone, so we prefer the counterfactual measure and view attention as a cost reduction rather than the primary signal.  

> 9.8 Failure modes

The method has two characteristic failure modes. A baseless addition that is topically plausible may draw weak support from several units at once, so no single removal produces a large drop and the span looks grounded, which is consistent with the slightly lower detection of the baseless type. A grounded span whose supporting passage is split across two chunks may have its support divided, so the maximum single-chunk drop understates its dependence. Both point to the same refinement, a chunking that aligns with the unit of support, and to combining the maximum with a top-few aggregation. The chunk count itself controls a trade-off, since very coarse chunks make almost every sentence react and narrow the contrast, while very fine chunks raise the cost and risk splitting a passage, so the useful regime is one where a chunk corresponds to a unit of evidence. In the range we tested, K ∈ { 3, 5, 10 } in Table 14, detection is insensitive to the choice, with coarser chunks marginally ahead, so within a reasonable range the trade-off is mild.  

> 9.9 Threat model

In the intended setting the threat is an honest generator that occasionally produces ungrounded content, not an adversary that crafts answers to evade the detector. Under that assump-tion the signal is well matched, since ordinary hallucinations are produced from the prior and are insensitive to context by construction. An adaptive adversary could in principle phrase an unsupported answer so that it borrows just enough from a passage to react under removal, which would raise its ground-ing sensitivity and evade the detector. Defending against such adaptive evasion is out of scope here, and it would require the usual robustness treatment of adaptive attacks, which we note as a direction rather than a claim. Evasion is not free for the adversary, however, since making an unsupported answer re-act to a passage means tying it to that passage content, which pulls the statement toward being grounded in it, so the space of unsupported answers that both evade the detector and remain ungrounded is narrower than the space of unsupported answers at large. The detector therefore raises the cost of producing fluent, unsupported content that also looks grounded under per-turbation, even if it does not eliminate it, and combining it with complementary signals would further constrain the adversary. 

10 Threats to Validity 

The construct validity of the labels depends on the human an-notations of the benchmark, which we take as ground truth, and annotation noise places a ceiling on measurable perfor-mance. The internal validity of the comparison depends on the leakage-clean protocol, which is easy to do incorrectly, since pooling all spans and running an ordinary cross-validation lets a classifier train on some sentences of an answer and test on others, and the resulting inflation is not small. Grouping folds by answer removes this path. The external validity rests on two benchmarks in two domains, RAGTruth and TofuEval, which is stronger than one but still a limited sample. The absolute numbers may therefore differ elsewhere, and short-answer ques-tion answering would need a different segmentation. The two task types were chosen because their answers are long enough for stable per-sentence estimation, and the method is expected to be weaker where answers are very short, since a sentence of a few tokens gives a noisy estimate of dependence. The three scorers span two model families, so the robustness we observe is across scale and across family, not within a sin-gle lineage. Three models are still a small sample, however. Beyond the scorers, benchmark coverage is improved but the method has a scope boundary that the coverage makes explicit. Grounding sensitivity shows clear, significant gains on two summarization-faithfulness benchmarks, RAGTruth and the MeetingBank portion of TofuEval in Section 7.6, which span two domains and two annotation schemes, but on the multi-domain short-answer QA of RAGBench in Section 7.7 it is only comparable to perplexity, which bounds the empirical claims to the summarization setting. In addition, all three benchmarks are English, which bounds the external validity of these results to English. The class-balanced sampling departs from the natural prior, which suits a threshold-free ranking metric but means the numbers are not operating-point estimates. For the base-lines, the entailment comparison uses both a compact and a large verifier and a self-consistency baseline, so it is not resting on one weak verifier. Conclusion validity is supported by the consistency of the effect across three independent scorers and across the response and span levels, together with bootstrap confidence intervals and paired significance tests that place the grounding gap over perplexity outside the interval on every scorer. This makes it unlikely that the result is an artifact of a single configuration, although a larger study with multiple benchmarks would strengthen the statistical claims further. We also note that the class-balanced construction is a deliberate choice for measuring ranking quality and is not a claim about prevalence, so the numbers should not be read as the rate at which a live system hallucinates.  

> Page 21 of 23 Research Article Bouke, 2026

11 Ethical Considerations 

A hallucination detector is a safety tool, and its limitations carry ethical weight. The detector is imperfect, so it must support human review rather than replace it, and an automated filter that silently drops flagged content could suppress correct statements that score low. Over-reliance is a second risk, since a detector that is usually right can train its users to stop checking, so a sentence that slips through is trusted more, not less. Separately, the method does not generate content and adds no data collec-tion beyond the public benchmark, and the supporting-passage explanation is intended to keep a person in the loop. We rec-ommend deploying it as an assistive guardrail that surfaces and explains, with final judgment left to a person in high-stakes settings, and communicating its confidence and known failure modes alongside its flags. Transparency about scope is part of responsible use. The detector judges grounding in the re-trieved evidence, not truth in the world, so a statement that is faithfully grounded in a passage that is itself wrong will not be flagged, and users should understand that the tool checks consistency with the provided sources rather than correctness. Presenting the supporting passage alongside each decision helps here, because it lets a reviewer judge both whether the sentence is grounded and whether the source it relies on is trustworthy, which is a judgment the detector does not make on its own. 

12 Conclusion 

We presented GASP, a span-level detector for hallucination in RAG that scores each answer sentence by its grounding sen-sitivity, how strongly its likelihood depends on the retrieved evidence. We framed decoding under a context as a context-conditioned RNIFS whose invariant measure is the attractor of grounded continuations, and we measured the sensitivity of that attractor to context perturbation using log-likelihood drops and JSD under leave-one-context-out removal. On two span-annotated benchmarks in two domains, RAGTruth and the MeetingBank portion of TofuEval, with three instruction-tuned scorers spanning two model families and a leakage-clean eval-uation, grounding sensitivity outperformed perplexity, with a significant gap under a paired bootstrap test on all three scor-ers, and outranked length, whole-context entailment, and a self-consistency baseline, while remaining competitive with a well-configured chunk-level entailment verifier at the span level. It was consistent across the three tested scorers and produced a candidate supporting passage for each flag at no extra cost. A probe on the multi-domain short-answer QA of RAGBench marked the boundary of the approach, since there grounding sensitivity was only comparable to perplexity, which places the method in settings where the answer must be constructed from the retrieved context rather than recalled from parametric knowledge. The approach reframes hallucination as a failure of dependence on evidence rather than a property of the text, and it offers an explainable, inexpensive guardrail for retrieval-augmented systems. More broadly, it argues for measuring grounding through controlled perturbation of the evidence, a principle that extends beyond the specific features used here. The qualitative finding, that the reaction to evidence removal separates grounded from ungrounded content where intrinsic fluency does not, follows from what grounding means rather than from the particular instantiation we evaluated. 

13 Limitations and Future Work 

The absolute AUC is moderate, in the range from 0.64 to 0.75 ,which is expected for hard hallucination detection with small models and a compact feature family, and which marks the method as a signal that beats standard baselines rather than a finished product. Larger and stronger instruction-following scorers may raise the ceiling, and the same perturbation machin-ery applies unchanged. Additional RAG domains and bench-marks would test external validity, and the method is language-agnostic in principle, so an evaluation in other languages, in-cluding low-resource settings where annotated data is scarce, would test whether grounding sensitivity transfers. The empir-ical comparison covers the baseline families that can be run under a single leakage-clean protocol, and it does not include a head-to-head with the white-box mechanistic detectors or with a supervised RAGTruth-trained judge, which occupy different operating regimes. A unified benchmark that evaluates black-box and white-box detectors under one protocol would make these comparisons direct and is left to future work. The per-type finding motivates separating the direction of sensitivity from its magnitude. Multi-passage support, where a claim rests on the combination of two or more passages that the single-chunk maximum cannot capture, motivates a small-subset removal or a top-few aggregation. Cheaper approximations of the pertur-bation, for example attention-based or gradient-based proxies, would reduce the linear cost in the number of chunks. An adap-tive chunking that follows retriever passage boundaries would align the unit of removal with the unit of evidence and is likely to sharpen both detection and localization. Finally, the quantita-tive link between the measured divergence and the movement of the invariant measure, which Proposition 1 establishes under an average-contraction assumption and Section 8.7 tests on the hidden states, could be tightened into a model-specific bound by estimating the contraction and spread constants of a given network directly, which would replace the qualitative account with a numerical guarantee. 

Declarations 

• Funding: Not applicable. • Conflict of Interest: The author declares no competing interests. • Availability of Data and Materials: All three bench-marks are publicly available (RAGTruth, the Meeting-Bank portion of TofuEval, and RAGBench). The full implementation and evaluation pipeline, including the scoring, feature extraction, leakage-clean evaluation, and the scripts that generate every table and figure, is avail-able as open-source code at https://github.com/ drbouke/GASP .• Ethics Approval: Not applicable.  

> Page 22 of 23 Research Article Bouke, 2026

Author Biography 

Mohamed Aly Bouke is a Postdoc-toral Researcher at Multimedia University, Malaysia, and a Senior Member of IEEE. He received his PhD in Information Secu-rity from Universiti Putra Malaysia. He serves as an Associate Editor for e-Prime – Nexus of Electrical, Electronic, and In-telligent Engineering . His research inter-ests include cybersecurity, artificial intel-ligence, cryptography, and mathematical modeling. 

References 

[1] P. Lewis, E. Perez, A. Piktus, F. Petroni, et al., “Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2020. [2] Z. Ji, N. Lee, R. Frieske, T. Yu, et al., “Survey of halluci-nation in natural language generation,” ACM Computing Surveys , vol. 55, no. 12, pp. 1–38, 2023. [3] L. Huang, W. Yu, W. Ma, W. Zhong, et al., “A survey on hallucination in large language models: Principles, taxonomy, challenges, and open questions,” ACM Trans-actions on Information Systems , 2025. [4] S. Farquhar, J. Kossen, L. Kuhn, and Y. Gal, “Detecting hallucinations in large language models using semantic entropy,” Nature , vol. 630, pp. 625–630, 2024. [5] C. Chen et al., “INSIDE: LLMs’ internal states retain the power of hallucination detection,” in International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024. [6] G. Sriramanan, S. Bharti, V. S. Sadasivan, S. Saha, P. Kattakinda, and S. Feizi, “LLM-Check: Investigating detection of hallucinations in large language models,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2024. [7] P. Manakul, A. Liusie, and M. J. F. Gales, “SelfCheck-GPT: Zero-resource black-box hallucination detection for generative large language models,” in Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing (EMNLP) , 2023. [8] S. Min, K. Krishna, X. Lyu, M. Lewis, et al., “FActScore: Fine-grained atomic evaluation of factual precision in long form text generation,” in Proceedings of the Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-cessing (EMNLP) , 2023. [9] B. Cohen-Wang, H. Shah, K. Georgiev, and A. Madry, “ContextCite: Attributing model generation to context,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2024. [10] Y. - S. Chuang, L. Qiu, C. - Y. Hsieh, R. Krishna, Y. Kim, and J. Glass, “Lookback lens: Detecting and mitigating contextual hallucinations in large language models using only attention maps,” in Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , 2024. [11] Z. Sun et al., “ReDeEP: Detecting hallucination in retrieval-augmented generation via mechanistic inter-pretability,” in International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2025. [12] S. Yeh, Y. Li, and T. Mallick, “LUMINA: Detecting hallucinations in RAG systems with context-knowledge signals,” in International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations (ICLR) , 2026. [13] C. Niu, Y. Wu, J. Zhu, S. Xu, et al., “RAGTruth: A hallucination corpus for developing trustworthy retrieval-augmented language models,” in Proceedings of the An-nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics (ACL) , 2024. [14] S. Es, J. James, L. Espinosa-Anke, and S. Schockaert, “RAGAs: Automated evaluation of retrieval augmented generation,” in Proceedings of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (EACL): System Demonstrations , 2024. [15] Á. Kovács and G. Recski, LettuceDetect: A hallucina-tion detection framework for RAG applications , arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.17125, 2025. [16] M. A. Bouke, “Fractal attractors in random nonlinear it-erated function systems: Existence, stability, and dimen-sional properties,” Chaos, Solitons & Fractals , vol. 207, p. 117 996, 2026. [17] G. Ke, Q. Meng, T. Finley, T. Wang, et al., “Light-GBM: A highly efficient gradient boosting decision tree,” 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2017. [18] L. Tang, I. Shalyminov, A. W. -m. Wang, J. Fang, et al., “TofuEval: Evaluating hallucinations of large language models on topic-focused dialogue summarization,” in 

Proceedings of the Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL) , 2024. [19] Y. Hu, T. Ganter, H. Deilamsalehy, F. Dernoncourt, H. Foroosh, and F. Liu, “MeetingBank: A benchmark dataset for meeting summarization,” in Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) , 2023. [20] R. Friel, M. Belyi, and A. Sanyal, “RAGBench: Explain-able benchmark for retrieval-augmented generation sys-tems,” in arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.11005 , 2024. [21] Qwen Team, “Qwen2.5 technical report,” Alibaba Group, Tech. Rep., 2025, arXiv preprint. [22] L. B. Allal, A. Lozhkov, E. Bakouch, et al., “SmolLM2: When smol goes big – data-centric training of a small lan-guage model,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.02737 , 2025.