Title: ProCap: Prominence-guided Object Rectification for Faithful and Comprehensive Video Captioning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.21022v1

Published Time: Fri, 24 Jul 2026 00:37:59 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
> JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 1

# ProCap: Prominence-guided Object Rectification for Faithful and Comprehensive Video Captioning 

Debjyoti Das Adhikary , Aritra Hazra , and Partha Pratim Chakrabarti ,

Abstract —Improving video captioning quality typically de-mands retraining large vision-language models, an expensive and often impractical requirement. Existing training-free alternatives instead ground captions in detected objects to curb halluci-nation, but apply only a single, fixed correction pass without prioritizing which objects matter most, leaving semantically significant content omitted. We propose a prominence-aware, iterative post-hoc rectification framework that overcomes both limitations without modifying the underlying captioning model’s parameters: a lightweight scoring mechanism ranks detected objects by spatial saliency, temporal persistence, and relational dynamics, and an iterative, prompt-driven refinement loop uses this ranking to progressively inject missing yet contextually relevant objects into the caption over multiple rounds. We validate the framework on MSVD and MSR-VTT using object-grounded automatic metrics, a 110-participant human study, and qualitative comparison against ChatGPT and Gemini; in human evaluation, the framework raises perceived completeness by up to 48% and reduces hallucination by up to 45% relative to a strong pretrained captioning baseline, all without retraining or reference captions. These results position prominence-guided it-erative rectification as a lightweight, scalable, and model-agnostic route to more complete and trustworthy video captioning, with direct relevance to accessibility, retrieval, and other multimedia understanding applications. 

Index Terms —Video Captioning, Multimodal Learning, Se-mantic Rectification, Object Prominence Modeling. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Recent advances in Vision Language Models (VLMs) and Large Language Models (LLMs) have driven substan-tial progress in multimodal understanding, spanning image captioning, visual question answering, visual grounding, and video understanding. Among these, video captioning – the task of generating a concise, semantically faithful natural-language description of a video – has emerged as a key enabling tech-nology for accessibility, video retrieval and summarization, surveillance, and Human Computer Interaction [1]–[3]. Unlike image captioning, video captioning requires jointly modeling spatial appearance, temporal evolution, and object interactions across a sequence of frames while remaining faithful to the visual content, without hallucinating or omitting salient entities – a far from academic concern, since overlook-ing a critical object in a surveillance clip, hallucinating entities in a medical video, or producing an ambiguous accessibil-ity caption can each directly mislead downstream decisions. Effective video captioning therefore demands joint reasoning   

> The authors are with the Department of Computer Science and Engi-neering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, Kharagpur 721302, India (e-mail: debjyoti.das.adhikary@kgpian.iitkgp.ac.in; aritrah@cse.iitkgp.ac.in; ppchak@cse.iitkgp.ac.in).

over appearance, motion, and temporal consistency, deliver-ing semantic completeness and visual faithfulness alongside linguistic fluency. Driven by large-scale pretraining, the field has shifted from CNN/RNN encoder–decoder pipelines toward Transformer-based vision–language foundation models such as mPLUG-2 [4], Video-LLaMA [5], and Gemini [6], which substantially improve fluency and zero-shot generalization [7] but remain fundamentally generative – prioritizing linguistic plausibil-ity over strict visual grounding, and consequently prone to omitting or hallucinating objects in ways standard reference-based metrics (BLEU, METEOR, CIDEr) do not penalize. Post-hoc rectification methods address this without retraining by grounding captions in externally detected objects; our own prior framework, ReCap, illustrates their key limitation, however – it corrects captions only at the frame level and aggregates them via a single-pass LLM summarization, treat-ing every detected object as equally important and leaving semantically significant content omitted. Section II discusses this literature in detail. This motivates a framework that (i) explicitly ranks detected objects by semantic importance rather than treating them uniformly, and (ii) refines the video-level caption iteratively rather than in a single pass – entirely post-hoc, without modifying the underlying captioning model itself. We introduce a prominence-aware, iterative post-hoc rectifi-cation framework that extends ReCap along both axes (Fig. 1). A prominence score jointly models each detected object’s visual appearance, temporal persistence, and spatial dynamics to estimate its semantic importance; an iterative, prompt-driven refinement loop then repeatedly compares the generated caption against high-prominence objects and injects contex-tually relevant, missing entities. Across MSVD and MSR-VTT [8], the resulting captions achieve consistently higher object-grounded completeness and lower inconsistency than both the base captioner and single-pass prompting, a finding corroborated by human evaluation and qualitative comparison against ChatGPT and Gemini. The primary contributions of this work are as follows:  

> •

Prominence-aware semantic modeling: We introduce a novel prominence formulation that jointly models object appearance, temporal persistence, and spatial dynamics to estimate the semantic importance of objects within a video.  

> •

Post-hoc, iterative prominence-guided refinement: We propose a lightweight, model-agnostic framework that iteratively incorporates missing high-prominence objects into the caption through structured, LLM-based prompt-ing, without retraining the underlying captioning model. arXiv:2607.21022v1 [cs.CV] 23 Jul 2026 JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 2Input Video         

> Video Captioning via Rectification
> Prominence Aware Object Scoring
> Iterative Refinement Loop
> Prompt Engineering Fusion and generation Layer
> Final Captions
> “baby boy in the cradle ”
> “Any objects remaining ?”
> Prominence:
> 0.236
> Summarize the
> Captions to explain
> the video
> “Generate Caption
> Variants
> Fig. 1. Overview of the proposed prominence-guided rectification framework.
> •

Comprehensive evaluation: We validate the proposed approach through automatic object-grounded metrics, hu-man evaluation, and qualitative comparison with state-of-the-art LLMs such as ChatGPT and Gemini. Overall, the proposed framework offers a lightweight, scalable, and model-agnostic strategy for improving the faithfulness and completeness of video captioning systems. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Sec-tion II reviews related literature; Section III details the pro-posed architecture; Section IV describes the datasets, metrics, and experimental protocol; Section V presents the quantitative, human, and qualitative results; and Section VI concludes with directions for future work. CODE AND DATA AVAILABILITY 

The source code implementing the proposed ProCap frame-work including the prominence scoring, rectification, and iterative refinement modules is publicly available at: https: //github.com/Debjyoti-Adhikary/ProCap. The MSR-VTT and MSVD benchmark datasets used for evaluation are publicly available from their original sources. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Classical Encoder Decoder Video Captioning 

The Classical video captioning models were built on the idea of sequence-to-sequence frameworks. Early approaches used Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) to encode the visual frames from the input video and Recurrent Neural Networks (typically LSTMs) to generate the final descriptions [9], [10]. These models often incorporated temporal attention to focus on salient frames [11]. For example, [12] intro-duced a CNN–LSTM model that achieved good BLEU/CIDEr scores on benchmarks. At this stage, success was measured largely by n-gram overlap metrics (BLEU, METEOR, CIDEr), so research emphasized improving these scores through en-coder–decoder architectures. Because this approach of gen-erating captions achieved high metric scores, it became the standard baseline in video captioning [13], [14]. Yet such models depended heavily on matching reference captions, often at the expense of deeper semantic understanding. 

B. Grounding Based and Saliency Aware Captioning 

To address faithfulness, grounding-based and object-aware methods were proposed. These approaches integrate explicit visual detectors or attention over object regions to ground the captions in image content [15], [16]. For example, [17] and [18] incorporate object detectors or scene graphs so that the generated words align with detected entities. These mod-els improve on hallucination by filtering generated captions against detected objects: if an object appears in the frame but is not mentioned, the model can be guided to include it. Similarly, some methods use visual grounding objectives or auxiliary classification loss to ensure objects are described. Because grounding ties words to actual pixels, these works reduced obvious errors. However, they have limitations. Most grounding approaches still rely on end-to-end training and do not guarantee inclusion of all important objects. They often treat all detections equally, lacking a mechanism to prioritize prominent entities. In other words, grounding meth-ods improved consistency but did not systematically ensure completeness, and they often required retraining the model on combined tasks (captioning + object detection). 

C. Post Hoc Rectification Frameworks 

Recently, post-hoc rectification frameworks have been in-troduced to correct captioning errors without retraining the base model. In image captioning, [19] proposed ReFrame, which plugs an object detector on top of a pre-trained cap-tioner. ReFrame inspects the initial caption and adds missing objects (or removes hallucinated ones) to improve consistency. Inspired by this, video captioning work like ReCap [20] applies a two-stage pipeline: it first generates captions for key frames, then uses a detector to filter and refine them before summarizing into a final caption. These rectification methods explicitly enforce that only detected objects appear in the text. Because they operate after caption generation, they can be model-agnostic plug-ins. Nevertheless, they share certain shortcomings. Most existing rectifiers perform a single pass over the caption and do not distinguish which objects are more important. In other words, they ensure correctness but not exhaustiveness. Moreover, they are not iterative: once corrected, the caption is final. Thus, rectification approaches improved factual accuracy but still lacked a mechanism to add missing content in multiple rounds. 

D. Large Vision Language Models and Prompt-Based Refine-ment 

Large Vision Language Models (VLMs) and prompting have brought new strategies for refinement. Some recent works use powerful LLMs (e.g. GPT-based models) by feeding them frame features or transcripts, effectively summarizing videos with minimal task-specific design [21], [22]. These LLM-based pipelines generate fluent descriptions, but they can still miss details unless specifically guided. Prompt-based methods have been used to improve captions by asking the model to include overlooked objects or verify content. For example, one can prompt an LLM with detected object names and instruct it JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 3

to rewrite the caption to include them. These methods leverage general language understanding but typically require carefully crafted prompts and do not inherently rank object importance. As a result, LLM based captioning models share some gaps: they excel at language but need explicit visual cues to ensure completeness. 

E. Limitations of Reference-Based Evaluation Metrics 

Reliance on n-gram metrics has limitations. BLEU and similar scores reward phrasing that matches training cap-tions but do not ensure the caption faithfully describes the video content [23], [24]. For example, a model can achieve high BLEU by using common phrases (e.g. ”a person is doing something”), even if it omits or hallucinates details. In practice, classical models frequently hallucinate objects not present in the video or miss relevant elements (e.g. failing to mention a dog that appears). This discrepancy between metric scores and factual accuracy has been noted in recent analysis work [25]. Because these pure generation models lack explicit grounding, high automatic scores did not prevent mistakes in object coverage. Hence, researchers observed that generation-based methods were insufficiently faithful: they often failed to capture all salient visual content. 

F. Research Gaps and Challenges 

Despite significant advancements in video captioning, ex-isting approaches continue to suffer from limitations related to semantic grounding, object hallucination, and incomplete coverage of salient visual entities. Classical encoder-decoder architectures (Section II-A) often generate generic captions with weak visual alignment, while recent LLM-based methods (Section II-D) improve fluency at the cost of introducing exter-nally inferred knowledge and hallucinated content. Although rectification-based frameworks such as ReFrame and ReCap (Section II-C) improve consistency through object-aware cor-rection, they primarily focus on frame-level grounding and do not address missing semantic content at the video-caption level. In summary, the literature shows a clear progression: generation-only models were accurate by metrics but un-grounded, grounding-based models reduced hallucination but still missed objects, and rectification approaches corrected errors post-hoc but in a one-shot manner. Because purely generative methods failed to be faithful, researchers proposed grounding and rectification frameworks. But those remedies still lacked mechanisms for emphasizing prominent objects and iteratively refining captions. Compounding this, as dis-cussed in Section II-E, the reference-based metrics used to evaluate these methods are themselves ill-suited to expose such omissions, leaving both the modeling and measurement of semantic completeness as open problems. Hence, our work introduces a prominence-aware iterative rectification frame-work – detailed in Section III – that goes beyond single-pass correction by ranking missing objects and re-generating captions in multiple rounds, leading to more complete and faithful video descriptions. 

Algorithm 1 Prominence-Guided Iterative Video Captioning Rectification 

Require: Video V; max refinement iterations R; prominence threshold τ

Ensure: Caption variants yshort , ylong , ˆy(r) (refined) 

// Frame-level captioning and rectification (Sec. III-A)  

> 1:

{f1, . . . , f T } ← EXTRACT KEY FRAMES (V) 

> 2:

S ← ∅ , O ← ∅  

> 3:

for each key frame ft do  

> 4:

st ← RECURSIVE CAPTION (ft) ▷ mPLUG  

> 5:

Dt ← DETECT (ft) ▷ YOLOv8 rectifier  

> 6:

st ← RECTIFY (st, Dt) ▷ prune ungrounded tokens  

> 7:

S ← S ∪ { st}; O ← O ∪ D t 

> 8:

end for 

// Prominence-aware object scoring (Sec. III-B)  

> 9:

for each object oi ∈ O do  

> 10:

compute Ai, Pi, Di ▷ Defs. 1–3  

> 11:

Π( oi) ← Ai · (Pi + Di − PiDi) ▷ Def. 4  

> 12:

end for  

> 13:

O∗ ← { oi ∈ O | Π( oi) ≥ τ }, ranked by Π( oi)

// Single-pass prompt variants (Sec. III-D)  

> 14:

yshort ← F LLM (S, O∗; prompt short ) 

> 15:

ylong ← F LLM (S, O∗; prompt long )

// Iterative refinement loop (Sec. III-C)  

> 16:

ˆy(0) ← F LLM (S) 

> 17:

for r = 1 to R do  

> 18:

M(r) ← { o ∈ O ∗ | o / ∈ ˆy(r−1) } 

> 19:

if M(r) = ∅ then  

> 20:

break ▷ no remaining semantic gap  

> 21:

else  

> 22:

ˆy(r) ← F LLM (ˆ y(r−1) , M(r), S) 

> 23:

end if  

> 24:

end for  

> 25:

return yshort , ylong , ˆy(r)

III. P ROPOSED ARCHITECTURE OF PRO CAP 

This section details the proposed architecture illustrated in Fig. 1. The functionality of each module is presented individually as explained in the Algorithm 1, after which their interaction and integration into the complete framework are discussed in the final subsection. 

A. Comprehensive Video Captioning via Rectification 

As established in Section II-C, ReCap [20] provides the architectural foundation for this work: a two-stage pipeline that rectifies frame-level captions against an external object detector before summarizing them into a single video-level caption via a single LLM pass, treating all detected objects as equally important. The proposed framework, ProCap, retains ReCap’s frame-level rectification stage unchanged (Fig. 1, as shown in the example 1) while directly addressing both limitations: Section III-B introduces prominence-guided object ranking, and Section III-C replaces the single summarization pass with an iterative refinement loop. 

Example 1 (Frame-Level Caption Inconsistency Across a Video) . Tix frames sampled extracted from the key frames JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 4

from a single video depicting a mother and her baby. A frame-level captioning model generated as per [20] produces the following captions independently for each frame:       

> 1) “baby boy in a cradle”
> 2) “person is a mother of two”
> 3) “person in the hospital with her baby”
> 4) “person in the hospital with her newborn baby”
> 5) “a woman holding a baby in her arms while sitting at a table”
> 6) “a woman and a child in a kitchen with a table”

B. Prominence Aware Object Scoring 

Once we obtain the processed captions for all frames capturing the significant events of the video, we employ an object segmentation model (YOLOv8, consistent with the rectifier module) to extract the set of objects present across the video [26]. In order to preserve the temporal alignment between detected objects and the corresponding frame-level captions, and to systematically quantify object saliency, spa-tial significance, and motion characteristics, we introduce a prominence-based scoring mechanism. This mechanism serves as the theoretical bridge between raw, unstructured object proposals and narratively cohesive semantic selection. For-mulating our proposed prominence metric requires abstracting the continuous, complex spatio-temporal elements of a video into a tractable scalar value that accurately reflects human perceptual attention. In the evaluated rectification framework, the prominence of an object instance, denoted as Π( oi), is mathematically decomposed into three distinct, normalized components: Appearance ( Ai), Presence ( Pi) and Dynamics (Di). These components are subsequently fused using a prob-abilistic union-inspired formulation. Let O = {o1, o 2, . . . , o N } denote the set of detected object instances across the video consisting of T frames. For each object oi, we define its prominence score Π( oi) as a function of three normalized components: Appearance ( Ai), Presence (Pi), and Dynamics ( Di), formalized below. The appearance component captures the spatial importance of an object within a frame. 

Definition 1 (Appearance) . The appearance score of object oi

is defined as the ratio of the object’s bounding box area to the total frame area, averaged over all frames in which the object is detected: 

Ai = 1

|Fi|

X

> t∈Fi

area (oti)

area (frame )

where Fi ⊆ { 1, . . . , T } denotes the set of frames in which object oi is detected. This ensures that objects occupying a larger visual re-gion—hence more likely to be perceptually significant—are assigned higher importance. The presence component models the temporal persistence of an object, capturing the intuition that objects consistently present throughout the video are more semantically relevant. 

Definition 2 (Presence) . The presence score of object oi is defined as the fraction of frames in which the object appears relative to the total number of frames in the video: 

Pi = |Fi|

T

(a) Frame 1 (b) Frame 2  

> Fig. 2. Visualization of object prominence estimation across three represen-tative frames.

Additionally, we incorporate Dynamics to model the inter-action and motion characteristics of an object. 

Definition 3 (Dynamics) . The dynamics score of object oi is defined as the normalized average change in spatial distance between the object and other co-occurring objects across frames: 

Di = 1

|Fi|

X

> t∈Fi

 1

|O t| − 1

X  

> oj∈O t,j ̸=i

∥cti − ctj ∥2

dmax 



This formulation captures relational movement and interac-tion intensity, thereby emphasizing objects that play an active role in the scene rather than remaining static or peripheral. To combine these factors into a single measure of object importance, we define the prominence score using a proba-bilistic union-inspired formulation: 

Definition 4 (Prominence Score) . Given the Appearance, Pres-ence, and Dynamics components of object oi, the prominence score Π( oi) is defined as: 

Π( oi) = Ai · (Pi + Di − PiDi)

This formulation can be interpreted as modeling the joint contribution of temporal persistence and dynamic interaction using an inclusion–exclusion principle, where (Pi+Di−PiDi)

represents the score of an object being either persistently present or dynamically significant. The multiplicative inter-action with Ai ensures that only visually salient objects are emphasized, thereby preventing small or insignificant objects from dominating the ranking despite high temporal or dynamic scores. To further illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed promi-nence formulation, Fig. 2 presents an example visualization of object prominence estimation across three representative frames sampled from an input video. Each frame contains the detected objects annotated with bounding boxes produced by the rectifier module. The visualization demonstrates how the proposed framework jointly considers spatial saliency, temporal persistence, and relational dynamics to determine the semantic importance of objects within the video. 

Example 2 (Prominence Scoring from the Example 1) . For the same video as Fig. 1 and 2, the detected person (the JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 5

baby) receives a substantially higher prominence score than the background dining table:               

> person: A= 0 .59 , P = 0 .40 , D = 0 .0004 ,Π=0.2361
> dining table: A= 0 .1676 , P = 0 .0973 , D = 0 .0004 ,Π=0.0164

Despite both objects having negligible dynamics (D ≈

0.0004 ), the person’s prominence is approximately 14 × that of the dining table, primarily due to its larger appearance ratio and longer temporal persistence. 

These values indicate that the person occupies a substan-tially larger spatial region within the frame sequence and per-sists for a longer temporal duration, resulting in a considerably higher prominence score. In contrast, although the dining table 

is consistently detected, its relatively smaller appearance ratio and lower persistence reduce its overall semantic significance. The low dynamics values in both cases further suggest limited inter-object motion, indicating that prominence in this example is primarily governed by appearance and temporal presence. The figure also highlights the temporal continuity of object tracking through the associated timestamps and centroid loca-tions. The detected person remains visible between timestamps 

00:15 and 00:24 , whereas the dining table is observed only be-tween 00:17 and 00:22 . This temporal information contributes directly to the persistence component of the prominence score, enabling the framework to distinguish primary scene entities from secondary or background objects. The resulting prominence score Π( oi) thus provides aprincipled measure of object importance by jointly capturing spatial saliency, temporal consistency, and relational dynamics. These scores are subsequently used to rank detected objects and guide the iterative caption refinement process, enabling the system to prioritize semantically significant entities that are more likely to contribute to a complete and faithful video description. 

C. Iterative Refinement Loop 

Although a single-pass caption generation mechanism can produce coherent summaries from frame-level descriptions, it often fails to capture all semantically relevant objects, leading to incomplete or partially grounded captions. We therefore introduce an iterative refinement loop – formalized as the closing stage of Algorithm 1 – that progressively improves caption quality by explicitly identifying and incorporating missing yet prominent objects, treating caption generation as a feedback-driven process in which successive iterations correct omissions without retraining the underlying model. Given a video V, the pipeline first aggregates frame-level captions S and extracts a set of prominent objects O∗ using the prominence-aware scoring mechanism (Algorithm 1, line 13). The iterative refinement process then generates a sequence of captions {ˆy(0) , ˆy(1) , . . . , ˆy(R)}, where ˆy(0) is the initial cap-tion and each subsequent iteration refines it by incorporating missing semantic elements. 

Initial caption (iteration 0). A base caption is generated solely from the aggregated frame-level descriptions (Algo-rithm 1, line 16): 

ˆy(0) = FLLM (S)

where FLLM denotes the prompt-conditioned generation func-tion of the language model. The prompt enforces conciseness (typically 10–12 words) and instructs the model to remove redundant or contextually inconsistent frame-level statements, producing a fluent but potentially incomplete caption that initializes refinement. 

Missing-object identification. For each subsequent itera-tion ( r > 0), we identify objects that are semantically relevant but absent from the current caption via a lexical grounding check (Algorithm 1, line 18): 

M(r) = {o ∈ O ∗ | o / ∈ ˆy(r−1) }

capturing the semantic gap between visual evidence and tex-tual description. 

Refinement. If M(r) is non-empty, the caption is updated as (Algorithm 1, line 22): 

ˆy(r) = FLLM (ˆ y(r−1) , M(r), S)

conditioning the model jointly on the current caption, the missing objects, and the original frame-level descriptions. This encourages the model to incorporate missing objects only when contextually consistent with the video content, while constraints on brevity and coherence prevent verbose or noisy outputs. The process is progressive: each iteration recomputes 

M(r) against the previous output ˆy(r−1) and replaces it, preserving already-correct semantic elements while selectively enriching the caption, until either the semantic gap closes or a fixed number of iterations R is reached. The following example shows the output of one video after the iterations. 

Example 3 (Iterative Refinement using the objects from Example 2) . This example illustrates the refinement process for the video shown in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2.  

> •

Iteration 0: “A newborn baby is seen inside a hospital room.”  

> •

Iteration 1 (+ mother): “A mother cradles her newborn baby inside a hospital room.”  

> •

Iteration 2 (Final + dining table): “A mother cradles her newborn baby while sitting at a table in the hospital.” 

(See Appendix D for the complete pipeline output, including the single-pass Short/Long variants of Section III-D.) 

D. Designing the Prompt 

To transform frame-level captions into a coherent, seman-tically faithful video-level description, we design a structured prompt engineering strategy that leverages large language models as a lightweight, training-free post-processing module. Let S = {s1, s 2, . . . , s K } denote the set of frame-level captions and O = {o1, o 2, . . . , o M } the set of detected objects derived from the prominence-aware module; the objective is to generate a consolidated caption ˆy that maximizes semantic consistency while minimizing redundancy and hallucination: 

ˆy = FLLM (S, O; θ)

where FLLM is the prompt-conditioned generation function of the language model, parameterized by decoding hyperparam-eters θ and instantiated through the four concrete templates in JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 6

TABLE I PROMPT TEMPLATES USED FOR CAPTION GENERATION .

Prompt Type Template 

Short Combine the following sentences from frames of a video into a single concise caption: {Frame captions }.Remove sentences that do not match the overall context. 

Medium Combine the following sentences from frames of a video into a single 10--12 word caption. Remove sentences that do not match the overall context: {Frame captions }. Output only the caption. 

Long Combine the following sentences from frames of a video into a single detailed 15--20 word caption. Remove sentences that do not match the overall context: {Frame captions }.Output only the caption. 

Object Insertion Additionally, if relevant, include these objects: O = {o1, o 2, . . . , o M }.

Table I: a short, a medium-length, and a long descriptive vari-ant, plus an object-insertion clause conditioning generation on 

O. These prompt variants impose explicit lexical and structural constraints on the generated output, effectively controlling the trade-off between brevity and semantic richness. Beyond these surface-level templates, every variant is conditioned on a common instruction schema that enforces four consistent design constraints on the language model, regardless of which prompt type is selected: 

Shared Instruction Schema 

1) Identify non-redundant core events 2) Generate a compact, fluent summary (1–2 sen-tences) 3) Include only objects present in the captions or object list 4) Avoid hallucination or external inference Together, the template-level constraints in Table I and this shared instruction schema ensure that every generated caption, irrespective of length, remains concise, non-redundant, and strictly grounded in the aggregated frame captions S and prominent object set O, forming the initialization point for the iterative refinement process described next. 

E. System Integration 

Fig. 3 and Algorithm 1 jointly summarize how the preceding modules: frame-level rectification (Section III-A), prominence scoring Section III-B), and iterative refinement (Sections III-C, III-D) compose into the unified ProCap pipeline: each stage’s output (rectified frame captions, ranked objects, structured prompts) feeds directly into the next, operating end-to-end as a modular, plug-and-play layer over the frozen captioning backbone with no retraining required. The aggregated frame captions and selected prominent objects are subsequently encoded into structured prompts and passed to the language model to generate an initial video-level caption. This caption Input Video                     

> Video Captioning via Rectification
> Frame
> Extractor
> mPLUG
> (Recursive Decoding
> Frame Captioning)
> Frame Level Captioning
> YoloV8
> Parallel Rectifier
> Rectifier Track
> Fusion and Generation Layer
> Frame Captions
> Detected Objects
> Prominence Aware Object Scoring
> Prominence Scoring
> Prominence
> Attribute sCombine: ς(𝑜 𝑖 )=𝐴 𝑖 .(𝑃 𝑖 +𝐷 𝑖 −𝑃 𝑖 𝐷 𝑖 )
> Appearance, Presence, Dynamics
> Object Ranking Layer
> Ranked
> Object Set
> Noise Filter
> (Prominence
> Threshold)
> Updated Ranked
> Object Set
> Iterative Refinement Loop
> Prompt Engineering
> Frame Captions
> •No redundancy
> •Object grounding
> •Faithfulness
> •No Hallucination
> Fusion and generation Layer
> Prompt Variation Selection
> •Short •Long •Refined
> Short
> Caption
> Long
> Caption
> Refined
> Caption
> Final Output

Fig. 3. Proposed Architecture illustrating the working and flow of constituent modules. 

is then iteratively refined by identifying missing prominent objects and updating the prompt accordingly, progressively improving semantic completeness while preserving fluency. Overall, the framework functions as a modular, plug-and-play enhancement layer that operates on top of existing video captioning models, requiring no retraining while enabling scalable and efficient caption refinement. IV. I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS AND SETUP 

A. Implementation Details 

All stages of the proposed pipeline, frame level captioning, YOLOv8-based rectification, prominence scoring, and LLM-based prompt refinement were executed on a dedicated GPU compute cluster of 4 nodes, each with dual 12-core/24-thread Intel Xeon (Skylake) processors, two NVIDIA Tesla P100 GPUs (16 GB HBM2, 3584 CUDA cores each), and 128 GB RAM, running Ubuntu 22.04.5 LTS. The underlying caption-ing backbone, mPLUG, was not trained from scratch: consis-tent with the previously established ReCap framework [20], it was trained following the protocol and hyperparameters of its original publication [4], and the resulting pretrained checkpoint is reused unchanged – the entire prominence-guided rectification and refinement pipeline operates on top of this fixed, frozen backbone without any additional fine-tuning or retraining. 

B. Datasets 

We evaluate the proposed framework on two widely adopted benchmarks for single-sentence video captioning: MSR-VTT 

and MSVD [8]. Both are standard testbeds in recent literature, allowing us to assess generalization across videos of varying complexity, scene diversity, and object distributions. 

1) MSR-VTT: MSR-VTT is one of the largest open-domain video captioning benchmarks, comprising 10,000 web video clips spanning 20 semantic categories (e.g., sports, music, cooking, news, gaming). Each 10–30 second clip is paired with about 20 human-written captions , yielding nearly 

200,000 annotations. We follow the standard split of 6,513 training , 497 validation , and 2,990 testing videos. JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 7

2) MSVD: MSVD (YouTube2Text) contains 1,970 

YouTube clips of everyday human activities, each roughly 

10 seconds long and annotated with nearly 40 English descriptions (about 80,000 captions total). We use the standard split of 1,200 training , 100 validation , and 670 testing videos. 

C. Human Evaluation via Survey-Based Assessment 

To complement standard automatic evaluation metrics and better capture the qualitative aspects of caption quality (see Section IV-D for why lexical-overlap metrics fall short), we conducted a structured, human-centered evaluation study. 

1) Study Design and Participants: The survey was admin-istered through a custom-built web interface accessible via a unique link, completed self-paced by each participant. Each task page presented a single video alongside the five caption variants (Table II), displayed in a randomized, vertically stacked layout under blinded labels ( Caption 1–5 ) rather than method names, to prevent bias toward recognizable systems; both video order and caption order were independently ran-domized per participant. A total of 100 clips were selected via stratified random sampling over video duration, drawn from a pool pre-filtered to exclude degenerate clips offering insufficient visual grounding for comparison; this sampling procedure was pre-registered before annotation to prevent post-hoc selection of favorable examples. A total of 110 profi-cient English speakers participated, with no Computer Vision or NLP background required; the study followed the ethical guidelines of the Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, with informed, voluntary, and anonymized participation. Participants rated each caption along two dimensions on a five-point Likert scale ( 1 = lowest, 5 = highest, no interme-diate anchors), judging only visible video content and rating each dimension independently of the other (see Appendix A for a representative screenshot of the deployed interface).:  

> •

Completeness (higher is better): how well the caption covers all important objects, people, and events visible in the video.  

> •

Inconsistency (lower is better): the degree to which the caption contains information that is factually incorrect, hallucinated, or unsupported by the video. 

2) Caption Variants and Score Aggregation: For each video, annotators rated all five variants shown in Table II: the benchmark ground truth, the mPLUG-2 baseline, the short and long prompt-based variants, and the final iteratively refined caption. Ground truth serves as an upper-bound completeness reference rather than a perfect-inconsistency baseline, since benchmark annotations can themselves contain minor inaccu-racies; mPLUG-2 serves as the primary external baseline. Ratings were aggregated at two levels: for each video v and variant c, scores were first averaged across all N annotators, 

Sv,c = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

S(i) 

> v,c

(1) then averaged again across all |V | evaluated videos, 

Sc = 1

|V |

X

> v∈V

Sv,c (2)       

> TABLE II DESCRIPTION OF CAPTION VARIANTS EVALUATED PER VIDEO .
> Label shown to annotator Description
> Caption 1-5 (randomized) Ground-truth annotation from the benchmark dataset mPLUG-2 output (state-of-the-art baseline) Short prompt-based variant (concise, ≤12 words) Long prompt-based variant (detailed, 15-20 words) Final iteratively refined caption

ensuring the reported figures reflect system-level performance rather than any single high- or low-difficulty instance. Per-centage improvements reported in Section 4 are the relative change from the baseline group b (base caption or mPLUG-2) to the proposed variant group c:

∆c+b = Sc − Sb

Sb

× 100% (3) where a positive ∆ is desirable for completeness and a negative 

∆ is desirable for inconsistency. 

D. Evaluation Metrics 

Although the proposed framework introduces a prominence-guided iterative refinement strategy, the primary objective is inspired from ReCap [20], i.e., generating captions that are both semantically complete and visually faithful. Conventional captioning metrics such as BLEU, METEOR, ROUGE-L, CIDEr, and SPICE evaluate lexical similarity with reference captions and therefore fail to determine whether a generated caption accurately represents the visual content of a video. Since the proposed framework is model-agnostic and does not rely on ground-truth supervision, the generated captions may differ substantially from the reference annotations while still providing a more comprehensive and faithful description of the scene. Consequently, we adopt the object-grounded evaluation metrics proposed in ReCap, namely Temporal Completeness and Temporal Inconsistency, which directly quantify the se-mantic correspondence between the generated caption and the visually significant objects present in the video, formalized below. 

1) Temporal Completeness: Temporal Completeness mea-sures the proportion of significant objects present in the video that are successfully described in the generated caption, where an object is regarded as significant if its temporal persistence exceeds a predefined threshold τ , thereby filtering short-lived detections while emphasizing visually important entities. 

Definition 5 (Temporal Completeness) . Adapted from [20], given a generated caption Ccap for a video V with T frames and a set of significant objects O = {o1, o 2, . . . , o n}, the Temporal Completeness score is defined as: 

C(Ccap , O, V ) = 1

|O|

> |O|

X

> i=1

I



oi ∈ R(Ccap ) ∧ |S(oi)|

T ≥ τ



,

(4) where R(Ccap ) denotes the set of objects mentioned in Ccap ,

S(oi) the temporal span of object oi, and I(·) the indicator function. JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 8

A higher Temporal Completeness score indicates that the generated caption successfully captures a larger propor-tion of the visually significant content. Since the proposed prominence-guided refinement explicitly incorporates omitted but important objects into the caption, improvements in this metric directly reflect the effectiveness of the proposed refine-ment strategy. 

2) Temporal Inconsistency: Temporal Inconsistency quan-tifies the complementary failure mode: the proportion of significant objects present in the video that are omitted from the generated caption, providing an object-centric estimate of semantic incompleteness and visual grounding errors. 

Definition 6 (Temporal Inconsistency) . Adapted from [20], using the same notation as Definition 5, the Temporal Incon-sistency score is defined as: 

I(Ccap , O, V ) = 1

|O|

> |O|

X

> i=1

I



oi /∈ R(Ccap ) ∧ |S(oi)|

T ≥ τ



.

(5) Unlike conventional hallucination metrics that primarily pe-nalize objects absent from the video, Temporal Inconsistency specifically captures missing salient objects, making it partic-ularly suitable for evaluating post-hoc refinement frameworks whose primary objective is to improve semantic coverage rather than lexical similarity. Within the proposed framework, the iterative refinement module repeatedly identifies high-prominence objects that remain absent from the current caption and incorporates them through structured prompting. Consequently, each refinement iteration is expected to reduce Temporal Inconsistency while simultaneously increasing Temporal Completeness. V. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS 

In this section, we evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed prominence-guided iterative rectification framework through a combination of automatic metrics, human evaluation, and qualitative analysis. The results are structured to highlight (i) improvements in semantic completeness and reduction in inconsistency, (ii) validation through human-centered survey analysis, and (iii) illustrative qualitative examples demonstrat-ing the impact of the proposed approach across datasets. 

A. Improvement in Completeness and Inconsistency 

We evaluate caption quality using the object-grounded Temporal Completeness and Temporal Inconsistency metrics defined in Eqs. (4)–(5) (Section IV-D), which respectively measure the coverage and omission of temporally-persistent, salient objects in the generated caption. The prominence-aware object selection mechanism is central to improving both: by prioritizing objects based on spatial saliency, temporal persistence, and relational dynamics, the framework directs refinement toward the entities most likely to be semantically significant, addressing the omissions observed in the base caption and mPLUG-2 baselines. Table III reports the resulting relative improvements (Eq. (3)) for the short and long variants against both baselines,                                        

> TABLE III RELATIVE IMPROVEMENT (∆,VIA EQ. (3)) IN AUTOMATIC TEMPORAL
> COMPLETENESS (∆C,HIGHER IS BETTER )AND TEMPORAL
> INCONSISTENCY (∆I,LOWER IS BETTER )FOR THE SHORT AND LONG VARIANTS OVER EACH BASELINE .
> Dataset Variant vs. Base Caption vs. mPLUG-2
> ∆C∆I∆C∆I
> MSVD Short +13.19% -42.88% +0.43% -2.75% MSVD Long ≈+11% ≈-36% ≈-1% ≈+8% MSRVTT Short +8.29% -30.11% ≈-2% ≈+12% MSRVTT Long ≈+9% ≈-30% ≈-2% ≈+13%

computed from Fig. 4. Both variants improve substantially over the unrectified base caption on both datasets, and the short variant on MSVD additionally edges out the mPLUG-2 baseline itself ( +0.43% completeness, -2.75% inconsistency) despite mPLUG-2 already being a strong, fluent captioner. On the remaining variant-baseline pairs, the two variants are broadly comparable to mPLUG-2 on these automatic, coverage-based metrics, while both substantially outperform the unrectified base caption in every case. Section V-B reports a clearer separation once caption quality is judged indepen-dently by human raters. 

B. Human Evaluation Results 

To validate whether these improvements translate to per-ceptual quality, we conducted the human evaluation study described in Section IV-C. Annotators rated the base caption and mPLUG-2 baselines alongside the short, long, and final (iteratively refined) variants on completeness and inconsis-tency; Fig. 5 reports the resulting means, and Table IV the corresponding relative improvements. All three variants improve substantially over both baselines on both dimensions. The long variant attains the strongest results overall, improving completeness by 64.61% over the base caption and 47.60% over mPLUG-2, while reducing inconsistency by 42.07% and 45.10% against the same two baselines – the largest hallucination reduction of any vari-ant. The short variant matches long’s completeness gain exactly (both scored 4.00/5) but achieves a more modest 

31.37% /34.97% inconsistency reduction, placing it between long and final on that dimension. The final variant, while not matching the short/long variants’ peak completeness, still improves completeness by 52.67% over the base caption and 36.90% over mPLUG-2, and reduces inconsistency by 

26.20% and 30.07% against the same baselines. This suggests the iterative refinement stage trades a modest amount of raw object coverage, relative to the single-pass long variant, for a more conservative and concise output, without sacrificing the large margin over both baselines. Notably, despite requir-ing no training on ground-truth captions, all three variants achieve human preference scores competitive with or superior to mPLUG-2, a fully supervised state-of-the-art captioner underscoring the practical utility of post-hoc, training-free refinement. JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 9

(a) MSRVTT: Completeness (b) MSRVTT: Inconsistency (c) MSVD: Completeness (d) MSVD: Inconsistency                               

> Fig. 4. Automatic Temporal Completeness (higher is better) and Temporal Inconsistency (lower is better) on MSRVTT and MSVD, computed via Eqs. (4)–(5). Bars are ordered: base (unrectified) caption, mPLUG-2 baseline, short-prompt variant, and long-prompt variant.
> Fig. 5. Mean human-evaluated Completeness (left, higher is better) and Inconsistency (right, lower is better) for the two baselines (base caption, mPLUG-2) and three prompt variants (short, long, final), on a 1–5 Likert scale. Error bars denote one standard deviation across annotators and videos. TABLE IV RELATIVE IMPROVEMENT (∆,VIA EQ. (3)) IN HUMAN -EVALUATED
> COMPLETENESS (∆C)AND INCONSISTENCY (∆I)FOR ALL THREE VARIANTS OVER EACH BASELINE ,COMPUTED FROM THE PRINTED MEANS IN FIG . 5.
> Variant vs. Base Caption vs. mPLUG-2
> ∆C∆I∆C∆I
> Short +64.61% -31.37% +47.60% -34.97% Long +64.61% -42.07% +47.60% -45.10% Final +52.67% -26.20% +36.90% -30.07%

C. Qualitative Comparison with Large Language Models 

The qualitative analysis presented in Table V highlights a key strength of the proposed framework: the generated cap-tions exhibit substantially lower reliance on hallucinated se-mantics and external prior knowledge while remaining closely grounded in the visual content of the video (Appendix B presents the complete 10-video comparison) highlights a key strength of the proposed framework: the generated captions exhibit substantially lower reliance on hallucinated semantics and external prior knowledge while remaining more closely grounded in the visual content of the video.. In contrast, Large Language Models such as ChatGPT and Gemini often generate fluent and descriptive captions by leveraging learned world knowledge, which often introduce semantically plausible but visually unsupported information. Red spans denote hallu-cinated or externally inferred content, green spans denote content corroborated across models, and blue spans in the proposed model’s predictions denote grounded details that both baselines omit. For example, in video1004 , Gemini identifies the scene as a documentary about Boko Haram and references Mohammed Yusuf and Nigeria, despite these details not being directly observable. Similarly, in video254 ,it attributes the action to a specific football player, whereas the video only depicts a generic football match. ChatGPT exhibits a similar tendency toward abstraction; for instance, in video106 , it describes performers, spectators, and tradi-tional attire, while the visual content primarily shows children playing outdoors. These examples demonstrate that general-purpose LLMs can be influenced by strong prior associations, whereas the proposed prominence-guided refinement frame-work remains visually grounded and semantically faithful, and thus more reliable for applications requiring high factual accuracy. VI. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 

This work presented ProCap, a post-hoc, model-agnostic framework that combines prominence-guided object ranking with iterative prompt-based refinement to address object omis-sion, hallucination, and semantic incompleteness in video cap-tioning, without retraining the underlying captioning model. Experimental results on the MSR-VTT and MSVD bench-marks validated through object-grounded automatic metrics and human evaluation – demonstrate consistent improvements JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 10 

TABLE V COMPARISON OF GENERATED CAPTIONS ACROSS DIFFERENT MODELS . RED = HALLUCINATED /UNSUPPORTED ; GREEN = CORROBORATED ACROSS CAPTIONS ; BLUE = GROUNDED DETAIL CAPTURED BY THE PROPOSED MODEL BUT OMITTED BY BOTH BASELINES .                        

> Video id ChatGPT Gemini Proposed Model Prediction
> video106 A performer enthusiastically dances in traditional attire on a street while spectators surround him, cheering and recording the lively moment. A group of children stand around a patio table outside, singing and using American Sign Language to perform. The kids are enjoying the summer on a deck, with a person and her brother having fun on a trampoline at a birthday party . video1004 The video appears to be a news-style clip showing a shirtless man standing outdoors while soldiers in camouflage uniforms stand behind him. This video from Vice News details the origins of the militant group Boko Haram . It highlights its founder, Muslim cleric Mohammed Yusuf . Asoldier walks past his comrades, then stands guard outside a building, watching as children walk down the street . video254 Afootball player celebrates passionately after scoring a dramatic goal during an intense professional match. Cristiano Ronaldo scores a powerful long-range free kick into the top corner during a professional soccer match. The video shows a man’s face, he celebrates scoring the opening goal with his team mates .

in semantic completeness, reduced inconsistency, and stronger alignment with human perception over baseline captioning approaches. Future work will incorporate complementary modalities such as audio. Further future work plans to employ more robust rectification modules (Appendix E) to further improve grounding accuracy and reduce repetitive frame context in the caption. We also plan to extend the prominence-guided framework to other multimodal reasoning tasks such as Visual Question Answering, where grounded object representations can enhance both factual correctness and interpretability. REFERENCES [1] X. Liu, P. Carrington, X. Chen, and A. Pavel, “What makes videos accessible to blind and visually impaired people?” in Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ,2021, pp. 1–14. [2] Y. Wu, W. Zhu, J. Cao, Y. Lu, B. Li, W. Chi, Z. Qiu, L. Su, H. Zheng, J. Wu et al. , “Video repurposing from user generated content: A large-scale dataset and benchmark,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 39, no. 8, 2025, pp. 8487–8495. [3] S. Tellex, N. Gopalan, H. Kress-Gazit, and C. Matuszek, “Robots that use language,” Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Systems , vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 25–55, 2020. [4] H. Xu, Q. Ye, M. Yan, Y. Shi, J. Ye, Y. Xu, C. Li, B. Bi, Q. Qian, W. Wang et al. , “mplug-2: A modularized multi-modal foundation model across text, image and video,” in International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, 2023, pp. 38 728–38 748. [5] H. Zhang, X. Li, and L. Bing, “Video-llama: An instruction-tuned audio-visual language model for video understanding,” in Proceedings of the 2023 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing: system demonstrations , 2023, pp. 543–553. [6] G. Comanici, E. Bieber, M. Schaekermann, I. Pasupat, N. Sachdeva, I. Dhillon, M. Blistein, O. Ram, D. Zhang, E. Rosen et al. , “Gem-ini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with advanced reasoning, multimodality, long context, and next generation agentic capabilities,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.06261 , 2025. [7] M. Yuan, G. Jia, and B.-K. Bao, “Gpt-based knowledge guiding network for commonsense video captioning,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia ,vol. 26, pp. 5147–5158, 2023. [8] J. Xu, T. Mei, T. Yao, and Y. Rui, “Msr-vtt: A large video description dataset for bridging video and language,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2016, pp. 5288– 5296. [9] D. Naik and J. CD, “Video captioning using sentence vector-enabled convolutional framework with short-connected lstm,” Multimedia Tools and Applications , vol. 83, no. 4, pp. 11 187–11 213, 2024. [10] L. Gao, Z. Guo, H. Zhang, X. Xu, and H. T. Shen, “Video captioning with attention-based lstm and semantic consistency,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia , vol. 19, no. 9, pp. 2045–2055, 2017. [11] C. Yan, Y. Tu, X. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Hao, Y. Zhang, and Q. Dai, “Stat: Spatial-temporal attention mechanism for video captioning,” IEEE transactions on multimedia , vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 229–241, 2019. [12] O. Vinyals, A. Toshev, S. Bengio, and D. Erhan, “Show and tell: A neural image caption generator,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2015, pp. 3156–3164. [13] P. Pan, Z. Xu, Y. Yang, F. Wu, and Y. Zhuang, “Hierarchical recurrent neural encoder for video representation with application to captioning,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2016, pp. 1029–1038. [14] Z. Zhang, D. Xu, W. Ouyang, and L. Zhou, “Dense video captioning using graph-based sentence summarization,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia , vol. 23, pp. 1799–1810, 2020. [15] G. Ma, C. Chen, S. Li, C. Peng, A. Hao, and H. Qin, “Salient object detection via multiple instance joint re-learning,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia , vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 324–336, 2019. [16] Y. Kong, Y. Wang, A. Li, and Q. Huang, “Self-sufficient feature enhanc-ing networks for video salient object detection,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia , vol. 25, pp. 557–571, 2021. [17] Y. Zhang, Y. Pan, T. Yao, R. Huang, T. Mei, and C.-W. Chen, “Learning to generate language-supervised and open-vocabulary scene graph using pre-trained visual-semantic space,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2023, pp. 2915– 2924. [18] J. Wang, Y. Yang, K. Liu, Z. Zhu, and X. Liu, “M3s: Scene graph driven multi-granularity multi-task learning for multi-modal ner,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing , vol. 31, pp. 111–120, 2022. [19] D. Das Adhikary, A. Hazra, and P. P. Chakrabarti, “Reframe: rectification framework for image explaining architectures,” in Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Data Science and Management of Data (12th ACM IKDD CODS and 30th COMAD) , 2024, pp. 52–60. [20] D. D. Adhikary, A. Hazra, and P. P. Chakrabarti, “Recap: Comprehensive video captioning via rectification and object-grounded frame summariza-tion,” in Asian Conference on Pattern Recognition . Springer, 2025, pp. 334–348. [21] Y. Tang, J. Bi, S. Xu, L. Song, S. Liang, T. Wang, D. Zhang, J. An, J. Lin, R. Zhu et al. , “Video understanding with large language models: A survey,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology , 2025. [22] A. Brimont, T. Zaharia, and R. Tapu, “A survey on video captioning in the era of large language models,” ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications and Applications , 2026. [23] N. Ullah and P. P. Mohanta, “Thinking hallucination for video caption-ing,” in Proceedings of the Asian Conference on Computer Vision , 2022, pp. 3654–3671. [24] H. Liu and X. Wan, “Models see hallucinations: Evaluating the factu-ality in video captioning,” in Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , 2023, pp. 11 807– 11 823. [25] T. Guan, F. Liu, X. Wu, R. Xian, Z. Li, X. Liu, X. Wang, L. Chen, F. Huang, Y. Yacoob et al. , “Hallusionbench: an advanced diagnostic suite for entangled language hallucination and visual illusion in large vision-language models,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2024, pp. 14 375–14 385. [26] R. Varghese and M. Sambath, “Yolov8: A novel object detection algo-rithm with enhanced performance and robustness,” in 2024 International conference on advances in data engineering and intelligent computing systems (ADICS) . IEEE, 2024, pp. 1–6.